The Project Gutenberg eBook of The book of witches, by Oliver Madox
Hueffer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The book of witches

Author: Oliver Madox Hueffer

Release Date: June 17, 2022 [eBook #68341]

Language: English

Produced by: Brian Coe, Graeme Mackreth and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
             Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF WITCHES ***




THE BOOK OF WITCHES




 THE
 BOOK OF WITCHES

 BY
 OLIVER MADOX HUEFFER

 _Author of "In Arcady and Out," &c._

 With Frontispiece in Colours by W. Heath Robinson


 THE JOHN McBRIDE CO
 NEW YORK
 1909




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I.

                                         PAGE

  ON A POSSIBLE REVIVAL OF WITCHCRAFT       1


  CHAPTER II.

  A SABBATH-GENERAL                        19


  CHAPTER III.

  THE ORIGINS OF THE WITCH                 45


  CHAPTER IV.

  THE HALF-WAY WORLDS                      61


  CHAPTER V.

  THE WITCH'S ATTRIBUTES                   88


  CHAPTER VI.

  SOME REPRESENTATIVE ENGLISH WITCHES     114


  CHAPTER VII.

  THE WITCH OF ANTIQUITY                  127


  CHAPTER VIII.

  THE WITCH IN GREECE AND ROME            141


  CHAPTER IX.

  FROM PAGANISM TO CHRISTIANITY           163


  CHAPTER X.

  THE WITCH-BULL AND ITS EFFECTS          188


  CHAPTER XI.

  THE LATER PERSECUTIONS IN ENGLAND       206


  CHAPTER XII.

  PERSECUTIONS IN SCOTLAND                232


  CHAPTER XIII.

  OTHER PERSECUTIONS                      253


  CHAPTER XIV.

  PHILTRES, CHARMS AND POTIONS            278


  CHAPTER XV.

  THE WITCH IN FICTION                    298


  CHAPTER XVI.

  SOME WITCHES OF TO-DAY                  315




FOREWORD


Lest any reader should open this volume expecting to read an
exhaustive treatise on witches and witchcraft, treated scientifically,
historically, and so forth, let me disarm him beforehand by telling
him that he will be disappointed. The witch occupies so large a place
in the story of mankind that to include all the detail of her natural
history within the limits of one volume would need the powers of a
magician no less potent than was he who confined the Eastern Djinn
in a bottle. I have attempted nothing so ambitious as a large-scale
Ordnance Map of Witchland; rather I have endeavoured to produce a
picture from which a general impression may be gained. I have chosen,
that is to say, from the enormous mass of material only so much as
seemed necessary for my immediate purpose, and on my lack of judgment
be the blame for any undesirable hiatus. I have sought, again, to show
whence the witch came and why, as well as what she was and is; to point
out, further, how necessary she is and must be to the happiness of
mankind, and how great the responsibility of those who, disbelieving in
her themselves, seek to infect others with their scepticism. We have
few picturesque excrescences left upon this age of smoothly-running
machine-wheels, certainly we cannot spare one of the most time-honoured
and romantic of any. And if anything I have written about her seem
incompatible with sense or fact, I would plead in extenuation that
neither is essential to the firm believer in witchcraft, and that to
be able to enter thoroughly into the subject it is above all things
necessary to cast aside such nineteenth-century shibboleths.

I would here express my gratitude to the many friends who have assisted
me with material, and especially to Miss Muriel Harris, whose valuable
help has done much to lighten my task.

 LONDON, _September, 1908_.




THE BOOK OF WITCHES




CHAPTER I

ON A POSSIBLE REVIVAL OF WITCHCRAFT


To the superficial glance it might seem that he who would urge a
revival of witchcraft is confronted by a task more Herculean than that
of making dry bones live--in that the bones he seeks to revivify have
never existed. The educated class--which, be it remembered, includes
those who have studied in the elementary schools of whatever nation--is
united in declaring that such a person as a witch never did, never
could, and never will exist. It is true that there are still those--a
waning band--who, preserving implicit faith in the literal exactitude
of revealed religion, maintain that witchcraft--along with Gardens of
Eden, giants, and Jewish leaders capable of influencing the movements
of sun and moon--flourished under the Old Dispensation, even though
it has become incredible under the New. Yet, speaking generally, the
witch is as extinct in civilised men's minds as is the dodo; so that
they who accept as gospel the vaticinations of race-course tipsters or
swallow patent medicines with implicit faith, yet moralise upon the
illimitability of human superstition when they read that witch-doctors
still command a following in West Africa, or that Sicilian peasants are
not yet tired of opening their purses to sham sorcerers.

Were the reality of sorcery dependent upon a referendum of our
universities--or, for that matter, of our elementary school
mistresses--it were at once proclaimed a clamant imposture. Fortunately
for the witch, and incidentally for a picturesque aspect of the human
intellect, the Enlightened, even if we include among them those who
accept their dogma as the New Gospel, are but a small--a ridiculously
small--item of the human race. Compared with the whole population
of the world, their numbers are so insignificant as to be for all
practical purposes nonexistent. There are villages but a few miles
beyond the boundary of the Metropolitan Police District, where the
witch is as firmly enthroned in the imaginations of the mobility
as in those of their ancestors three centuries ago. There are many
British legislators who would refuse to start an electioneering
campaign upon a Friday. I myself have known a man--and know him
still--a Romney Marshlander, who, within the last decade, has suffered
grievously--himself and through his children--at the hands of witches
whose names and whereabout he can detail. And I have known a woman--she
kept a lodging-house in the Kennington Road--who, if not herself a
witch, was yet the daughter of one, and of acknowledged power. It
is true that, if the daughter's tale--told to me in the small front
parlour in intervals between the crashing passage of electric trams and
motor-lorries--may be accepted, her mother's gifts were put to no worse
use than the curing of her Devonshire neighbours' minor ailments.

There is no need to go fifty, nor five, miles from London to find
material for a revival in Black Magic. Scarcely a week passes but some
old crone is charged before a Metropolitan police magistrate with
having defrauded silly servant-girls on the pretence of telling them
their futures. You cannot pass down Bond Street during the season
without encountering a row of sandwich-men--themselves preserving very
few illusions--earning a meagre wage in the service of this, that, or
the other Society crystal-gazer, palmist, or clairvoyant. Who has not
seen some such advertisement as the following--quoted from a current
journal--proffering information about the future, "calculated from
astrological horoscopes," at the very moderate charge of half-a-crown.
The advertiser--in deference to modern convention he is described as
a "Professor" rather than a sorcerer--further protests his mastery
of Phrenology, Graphology, Clairvoyance, and Psychometry. And this
advertiser is but one of many, all seeking to gain some humble profit
by following in the footsteps of Diana and Mother Demdyke of Pendle
Forest.

Are there not a hundred and one select Societies, each with its band
of earnest adherents--many with official organs, published at more or
less regular intervals and commanding circulations of a sort--openly
furthering "arts" such as would, two centuries ago, have entailed upon
their members the charge of Witchcraft? Is not spiritualism exalted
into an international cult? The very existence of such a coterie as the
"Thirteen Club," with a membership sworn to exhibit, _hic et ubique_,
their contempt of degrading superstitions, is the strongest testimony
to their ubiquitous regard. Most curious fact of all, it is in America,
the New World, home of all that is most modern and enlightened, that we
find superstitions commanding most implicit faith. It is only necessary
to glance through the advertisement pages of an American popular
magazine to realise how far the New World has outstripped the Old in
its blind adherence to this form of faith. Nowhere has the Hypnotic,
the Mesmeric, the Psychic Quack such unchallenged empire.

In Lady Charlotte Bury's "Memoirs of a Lady in Waiting," we find
an example of the belief in Witchcraft cherished in the most
exalted circle in the nineteenth century. Writing of the unhappy
Princess--later Queen--Caroline, wife of George IV., she says as
follows:--"After dinner her Royal Highness made a wax figure as usual,
and gave it an amiable addition of large horns; then took three pins
out of her garment and stuck them through and through, and put the
figure to roast and melt at the fire.... Lady ---- says the Princess
indulges in this amusement whenever there are no strangers at table,
and she thinks her Royal Highness really has a superstitious belief
that destroying the effigy of her husband will bring to pass the
destruction of his Royal Person." We laugh at this instance of Royal
credulity; yet is not the "mascot" a commonplace of our conversation?
Madame de Montespan, it is recorded, had recourse--not without
success--to the Black Mass as a means towards gaining the affections
of Louis XIV. It is but a few years since the attention of the police
was directed towards the practices of those--Society leaders for the
most part--who had revived, in twentieth-century Paris, the cult of
Devil worship. The most widely circulated London newspapers of the
day gravely discuss in "special articles" the respective value of
various mascots for motorists, or insert long descriptive reports of
the vaticinations of this spiritualist or that wise-woman as to the
probable perpetrators of mysterious murders. This is no exaggeration,
as he may prove for himself who has patience to search the files of the
London daily Press for 1907. And, be it remembered, the self-proclaimed
mission of the contemporary Press is to mirror the public mind as the
most obvious way of instructing it.

Under these circumstances it is easy to credit the possibility of
a revival of the belief in witchcraft even in the most civilised
countries of the modern world. What is more, it is far from certain
that such a revival would be altogether deplorable. Granted that oceans
of innocent blood were shed in the name of witchcraft--the same might
be said of Christianity, of patriotism, of liberty, of half a hundred
other altogether unexceptionable ideals. And, as with them, the total
extinction of the witchcraft superstition might, not impossibly, have
results no less disastrous than, for instance, the world-wide adoption
of European fashions in dress. This quite apart from any question of
whether or no witches have ever existed or do still exist. Even if
we grant that superstition is necessarily superstitious in the more
degraded sense of the word, we need not therefore deny it some share in
alleviating the human lot.

A very large--perhaps the greater--share of human happiness is based
upon "make believe."

The world would be dull, miserable, intolerable did we believe only
what our unfeeling stepmother Science would have us believe. It is
already perceptibly less endurable--for those unfortunate enough to
be civilised--since we definitely abandoned judgment by the senses in
favour of algebraical calculations. While it might be too much to say
that the number of suicides has increased in proportion to the decline
of witchcraft, it is at least certain that superstition of whatever
kind has, in the past, played a notable part in making humanity
contented with its lot. The scientist has robbed us of Romance--he has
taken from many of us our hope of Heaven, without giving us anything
to put in its place; he reduces the beauty of Nature to a formula, so
that we may no longer regard a primrose as a primrose and nothing more;
he even denies us the privilege of regarding our virtues and vices as
anything more than the inevitable results of environment or heredity.
Every day he steals away more and more of our humanity, strips us of
yet another of the few poor garments of phantasy shielding us from the
Unbearable. He is indeed the Devil of modern days, forcing knowledge
upon us whether we will or no. And we, instead of execrating him after
the goodly fashion of our forefathers, offer our happiness upon his
altars as though he were indeed the God he has explained away. And why?
Purely on the faith of his own asseverations.

Why should we accept the scientist more than his grandmother, the
witch? We have no better reason for accepting him than for rejecting
what he tells us are no more than idle dreams. Let him discover what he
will, it does but vouch the more decidedly for the illimitability of
his, and our, ignorance. It is true he can perform apparent miracles;
so could the witch. He pooh-poohs the arts that were so terrible to
former generations; our posterity will laugh at his boasted knowledge
as at a boastful child's. Already there are world-wide signs that
whatever his success in the material world, mankind is ready to revolt
against his tyranny over the Unseen. The innumerable new religious
sects, the thousand and one ethical fads, the renaissance of so many
ancient faiths--the Spiritualist and the Theosophist, the Christian
Scientist and the Cooneyite, the Tolstoyan and the Salvationist--laugh
at them individually who may--are all alike outward and visible signs
of the revolt of man against being relegated to the insignificance
of a scientific incident. And among such troubled waters witchcraft
may well come into its own again. For it, as much as any, has brought
happiness out of misery. Consider the unsuccessful man. Under the
_régime_ of enlightenment he can find no one to blame for his sorrows,
nor anywhere to look for their solacement. Everything works according
to immutable laws; he is sick, poor, miserable, because the Law of
the Inevitable will have it so; he has no God to whom he can pray for
some capricious alleviation; he cannot buy good fortune from the Devil
even at the price of his soul--there is no God, nor Devil, nor good
fortune nor ill; nothing but the imperturbably grinding cog-wheels
upon whose orbit he is inevitably bound. Were he not a happier man if
he might find an old-time witch whose spells, being removed, would
leave him hope, even though fulfilment never come? Undoubtedly. We have
been told that had there been no God, it would have been necessary to
invent one. Yes, and along with Him a Devil and good and evil spirits,
and good luck and bad, and superstitions as many as we can cram into
our aching pates--anything, everything that may save us from the
horrible conception of a machine-like Certainty, from which there is no
escape, after which there is no future. Surely it were better that a
few thousand old women be murdered in the name of superstition, a few
millions of human beings butchered in the name of religion, than that
all mankind be doomed to such a fate.

Be it remembered, too, that even the witch has her grievance against
the learned numbskulls who have undone her. For the witch-life was
not without its alleviations. Consider. Without her witchcraft she was
no more than a poor old, starved, shrunken woman, inconsiderable and
unconsidered, ugly, despised, unhappy. With it she became a Power.
She was feared--as all mankind wishes to be--hated perhaps, but still
feared; courted, also, by those who sought her help. She was again
Somebody, a recognisable entity, a human being distinguished from the
common ruck. Surely that more than outweighed the chances of a fiery
death. Nor was the method of her death without its compensations.
Painful indeed it was, though scarcely more so than slow starvation.
But if she knew herself innocent, she knew as well that her short agony
was but the prelude to the eternal reward of martyrdom. If she believed
herself, with that poor weary brain of hers, sold to the Devil, what a
world of consolation in the thought that he, the Prince of the Powers
of Darkness, scarcely inferior to the Almighty Himself, and to Him
alone, should have singled her out as the one woman whose help he
needed in all the countryside. And this being so, was there not always
the hope that, as he had promised, he might appear even at the eleventh
hour and protect his own. If he failed, the witch had but little time
to realise it and all the Hereafter, full of infinite possibilities,
before her. Few witches, I think, but would have preferred their grim
pre-eminence, with its sporting interest, to being made the butt of
doctors little wiser than themselves in the sight of infinity, held up
to mockery as silly old women, cozening or self-cozened.

If witches do not in fact exist for us, it is because we have killed
them with laughter--as many a good and evil cause has been killed. Had
we laughed at them from the beginning of things it is even possible
that they had never existed. But, as between them and Science, the
whole weight of evidence is in their favour. There is the universal
verdict of history. For untold centuries, as long as mankind has lorded
it over the earth, their active existence was never held in doubt,
down to within the last few generations. The best and wisest men of
their ages have seen them, spoken with them, tested their powers and
suffered under them, tried, sentenced, executed them. Every nation,
every century bears equal testimony to their prowess. Even to-day, save
for a tiny band of over-educated scoffers sprung for the most part from
a race notorious for its wrong-headed prejudice, the universal world
accepts them without any shadow of doubt. In August of the present year
a police-court case was heard at Witham, an Essex town not fifty miles
from London, in which the defendant stood accused of assaulting another
man because his wife had bewitched him. And it was given in evidence
that the complainant's wife was generally regarded as a witch by the
inhabitants of the Tiptree district. Nor, as I have already pointed
out, does Tiptree stand alone. Dare we, then, accept the opinion of
so few against the experience, the faith, of so many? If so, must we
not throw all history overboard as well? We are told that an Attila, a
Mahomet, an Alexander, or, to come nearer to our own days, a Napoleon
existed and did marvellous deeds impossible to other men. We read of
miracles performed by a Moses, a Saint Peter, a Buddha. Do we refuse
to believe that such persons ever existed because their recorded deeds
are more or less incompatible with the theories of modern science?
The witch carries history and the supernatural tightly clasped in her
skinny arms. Let us beware lest in turning her from our door she carry
them along with her, to leave us in their place the origin of species,
radium, the gramophone, and some imperfect flying-machines.

Those same flying-machines provide yet another argument in the witch's
favour. Why deny the possibility that she possessed powers many of
which we possess ourselves. The witch flew through the air upon a
broomstick; Mr. Henry Farman and Mr. Wilbur Wright, to mention two
out of many, are doing the same daily as these lines are written.
The vast majority of us have never seen either gentleman; we take
their achievements on trust from the tales told by newspaper
correspondents--a race of men inevitably inclined towards exaggeration.
Yet none of us deny that Mr. Farman exists and can fly through the air
upon a structure only more stable than a broomstick in degree. Why
deny to the witch that faith you extend to the aeronaut? Or, again, a
witch cured diseases, or caused them, by reciting a charm, compounding
a noxious brew in a kettle, making passes in the air with her hands.
A modern physician writes out a prescription, mixes a few drugs in a
bottle--and cures diseases. He could as easily cause them by letting
loose invisible microbes out of a phial. Is the one feat more credible
than the other? The witch sent murrains upon cattle--and removed them.
He were a poor M.R.C.V.S. who could not do as much. In a story quoted
elsewhere in this volume, a sorcerer of Roman days bewitched his horses
and so won chariot-races. We refuse him the tribute of our belief,
but we none the less warn the modern "doper" off our racecourses.
The witch could cause rain, or stay it. Scarcely a month passes but
we read well attested accounts of how this or that desert has been
made to blossom like the rose by irrigation or other means. But a few
months since we were told that an Italian scientist had discovered a
means whereby London could be relieved of fogs through some subtle
employment of electricity. It is true that since then we have had our
full complement of foggy weather; but does anyone regard the feat as
incredible?

In all the long list of witch-attainments there is not one that would
gain more than a passing newspaper paragraph in the silly season
were it performed in the London of to-day. Why, then, this obstinate
disbelief in the perfectly credible? Largely, perhaps, because the
witch was understood to perform her wonders by the aid of the Devil
rather than of the Dynamo. But must she be therefore branded as an
impostor? Certainly not by those who believe in a personal Spirit of
Evil. I do not know the proportion of professing Christians who to-day
accept the Devil as part of their faith, but it must be considerable;
and the same is the case with many non-Christian beliefs. They who can
swallow a Devil have surely no excuse for refusing a witch. Nor is the
difficulty greater for those who, while rejecting the Devil, accept
the existence of some sort of Evil Principle--recognise, in fact,
that there is such a thing as evil at all. For them the picturesque
incidentals of witch-life, the signing of diabolical contracts,
aerial journeyings to the Sabbath, and so forth, are but allegorical
expression of the fact that the witch did evil and was not ashamed,
are but roundabout ways of expressing a great truth, just as are the
first three chapters of Genesis or the story that Hannibal cut his way
through the Alps by the use of vinegar.

The conscientious agnostic, again, has no greater reason for
disbelieving in witches and all their works than for refusing his
belief to such historical characters as Cleopatra and Joan of
Arc--eminent witches both, if contemporary records may be trusted. I
pass over the great army of heterodox sects, Unitarians, Christian
Scientists, and the like, many of whom unite with the orthodox in
accepting the principle of Evil in some form or other, and with it,
as a natural corollary, the existence of earthly agencies for its
better propagation; while, for the rest, witchcraft stands in no worse
position than do the other portions of revealed religion which they
accept or do not accept, as their inclinations lead them.

It is sometimes held out as an argument for implicit belief in the
Biblical legend of the Deluge that its universality among all races
of mankind from China to Peru can only be accounted for by accepting
Noah and his Ark. How much more forcibly does the same argument uphold
the _bona fides_ of the witch. Not only has she been accepted by
every age and race, but she has everywhere and always been dowered
with the same gifts. We find the witch of ancient Babylon an adept
in the making of those same waxen or clay images in which, as we
have seen, a nineteenth-century Queen of England placed such fond
reliance. Witch-knots, spells, philtres, divination--the witch has
been as conservative as she has been enduring. Every other profession
changes and has changed its aspects and its methods from century to
century. Only the witch has remained faithful to her original ideals,
confident in the perfection of her art. And for all reward of such
unexampled steadfastness we, creatures of the moment, deny that this
one unchanging human type, this Pyramid of human endeavour, has ever
existed at all! Buttressed, then, upon the Scriptures, to say nothing
of the holy writings of Buddhist, Brahmin, Mahometan, and every
other religion of the first class, countenanced, increasingly though
unwittingly, by the researches of science into the vastness of our
ignorance; acceptable to orthodox and heterodox alike, vouched for by
history and personal testimony of the most convincing, our rejection
of the witch is based but upon the dogmaticisms of one inconsiderable
class, the impenitent atheist, blinded by the imperfection of his
senses into denying everything beyond their feeble comprehension. To
deny our recognition to a long line of women who, however mistakenly,
have yet, in the teeth of prodigious difficulties, persevered in their
self-allotted task with an altruistic enthusiasm perhaps unrivalled
in the history of the world--to relegate those who have left such
enduring marks upon the face of history to an obscure corner of the
nursery, and that upon such feeble and suspect testimony, were to
brand ourselves as materialists indeed. Rather let us believe--and
thus prove our belief in human nature--that long after the last
atheist has departed into the nothingness he claims as his birthright,
the witch, once more raised to her seat of honour, will continue to
regulate the lives and destinies of her devotees as unquestioned and as
unquestionable as she was in the days of Saul and of Oliver Cromwell.
It is to women that we must look chiefly for the impetus towards
this renaissance. Always the more devout, the more faithful half of
humanity, there is yet another peculiar claim upon her sympathies
towards the witch. In days such as ours, when the whole problem of
the rights and wrongs of women is among the most urgent and immediate
with which we have to deal, it were as anachronistic as unnatural
that Woman should allow the high purpose, the splendid endurance,
the noble steadfastness in inquiry, of a whole great section of her
sex--including some of the most deservedly famous women that ever
lived--should allow all this not only to be forgotten, but to be
absolutely discredited and denied. Persecuted by man-made laws as she
has ever been, and as eternally in revolt against them, there could be
no more appropriate or deserving figure to be chosen as Patroness of
the great fight for freedom than the much-libelled, much-martyrised,
long-enduring, eternally misunderstood Witch.

No. The time has come when we can appreciate the artistic temperament
of Nero; when Bluebeard is revealed to us in the newer and more kindly
aspect of an eccentric Marshal of France; when many of us are ready
to believe that Cæsar Borgia acted from a mistaken sense of duty; and
that Messalina did but display the qualities natural to a brilliant
Society leader. Surely among them all not one is more deserving of
"whitewashing" than that signal instance of the _femme incomprise_, the
Witch. We may not approve all her actions, we may not accept her as an
example to be generally followed; let us at least so far escape the
charge of narrow-mindedness and lack of imagination as to pay her the
tribute, if not of a tear, at least of respectful credulity.




CHAPTER II

A SABBATH-GENERAL


It is wild weather overhead. All day the wind has been growing more
and more boisterous, blowing up great mountains of grey cloud out of
the East, chasing them helter-skelter across the sky, tearing them
into long ribbons and thrashing them all together into one whirling
tangle, through which the harassed moon can scarcely find her way. The
late traveller has many an airy buffet to withstand ere he can top the
last ascent and see the hamlet outlined in a sudden glint of watery
moonlight at his feet. Those who lie abed are roused by the moaning in
the eaves, to mutter fearfully, "The witches are abroad to-night!"

The witch lives by herself in a dingle, a hundred yards beyond the
last cottage of the hamlet. The dingle is a wilderness of brush-wood,
through which a twisted pathway leads to the witch's door. Matted
branches overhang her roof-tree, and even when the moon, breaking for a
moment from its net of cloud, sends down a brighter ray than ordinary,
it does but emphasise the secretiveness of the ancient moss-grown
thatch and the ill-omened plants, henbane, purple nightshade, or white
bryony, that cluster round the walls. He were a bold villager who dared
venture anywhere within the Witch's dingle on such a night as this.
The very wind wails among the clashing branches in a subdued key, very
different from its boisterous carelessness on the open downs beyond.

There is but one room--and that of the barest--in the witch's cottage.
The village children, who whisper of hoarded wealth as old Mother
Hackett passes them in the gloaming, little know how scant is the fare
and small the grace they must look for who have sold themselves to such
a master. She sleeps upon the earthen floor, with garnered pine-needles
for mattress. She has a broken stool to sit on, and a great iron pot
hangs above the slumbering embers on the clay hearth.

It wants still an hour to midnight, this eve of May Day, when there
comes a stirring among these same embers. They are thrust aside, and
up from beneath them Something heaves its way into the room. It is
the size of a fox, black and hairy, shapeless and with many feet.
From somewhere in its middle two green eyes shed a baleful light that
horribly illuminates the room. It moves across the floor, after the
manner of a great caterpillar, and as it nears her the witch casts a
skinny arm abroad and mutters in her sleep. It reaches the bed, lifts
itself upon it, and mumbles something in her ear. She awakes, rises
upon her elbow, and replies peevishly. She has no fear of the Thing--it
is a familiar visitant. She is angry, and scolds it in a shrill old
voice for disturbing her too soon. Has she not the Devil's marks upon
her--breast and thigh--round, blue marks that are impervious to all
pain from without, but itch and throb when it is time for her to go
about her devilish business? The Thing takes her scoldings lightly,
twitting her with having overslept herself at the last Sabbath--which
she denies. They fall a-jesting; she calls it Tom--Vinegar Tom; and
they laugh together over old exploits and present purposes.

A moonbeam glints through a hole in the thatch. Where the witch has
lain now sits a black cat, larger than any of natural generation--as
large, almost, as a donkey. It talks still with the witch's voice, and
lingers awhile, the two pairs of green eyes watching each other through
the darkness. At last, with a careless greeting, it bounds across the
floor, leaps up the wall to the chimney opening, and is gone. The
shapeless Thing remains upon the bed. Its sides quiver, it chuckles
beneath its breath in a way half-human, yet altogether inhuman and
obscene.

The black cat is hastening towards the hamlet under the shadow of the
brush-wood. When she comes within sight of the end house, she leaves
the path and strikes out into the gorse-clad waste beyond the pasture,
keeping to it until she is opposite the cottage of Dickon the waggoner.
A child has been born, three days back, to Dickon and Meg his wife.
It is not yet baptised, for the priest lives four miles away, beyond
the downs, and Dickon has been too pressed with work to go for him.
To-morrow will be time enough, for it is the healthiest child, not to
say the most beautiful, the gossips have ever set eyes upon. Perhaps,
if Meg had not forgotten in her new-found happiness how, just after her
wedding, when old Mother Hackett passed her door, she made the sign of
the cross and cried out upon the old dame for a foul witch, she might
not be sleeping so easily now with her first-born on her bosom.

The black cat creeps on under the shadow of a hedge. Old Trusty, the
shepherd's dog, left to guard the flock during the night, sees where
she goes, and, taking her for a lurking fox, charges fiercely towards
the hedge, too eager to give tongue. But at the first flash of the
green eyes as she turns her head, he knows with what he has to deal,
and flies whimpering for shelter in the gorse, his tail between his
legs. For a dog can tell a witch more readily than can his master--and
fears her as greatly.

The black cat being come to Dickon's cottage, waits for a moment to
be sure that all is quiet, then leaps upon the low roof, gains the
summit, and so descends by way of the chimney to the room where lie the
sleeping family. Again it waits, listening to their regular breathing,
its tail whipping to and fro in suppressed excitement. It rises upon
its hinder legs and makes certain passes in the air, North and South
and East and West. It approaches the bed, and softly, softly draws the
child from its sleeping mother's arms. It makes again for the chimney,
and in two bounds is in the open air, carrying the child nestled
against its warm black fur. Scarcely has it gained the shadow of the
hedge when the mother, her sleep disturbed, it may be, by some vague
presentiment of danger, opens her eyes. But the warm weight is still
upon her breast, and she drops off to sleep again in security. Did
you peep into the witch's cottage now, you would find that the black
shapeless Thing is gone. For the Devil's imps can take what shape they
will in their master's service.

The black cat, with its sleeping charge, hastens back towards the
dingle. Reaching the cottage, it places the child upon the bed, turns
twice, and in that moment the witch, clad only in her shift, stands
where the cat has been. She is awaiting something, and grows anxious
and uneasy, hobbling hither and thither about the room, mumbling
below her breath, and once, when the child wakes and wails, taking it
in her arms and hushing it, almost as might a woman. It is close upon
midnight, yet the sign has not come. For the Evil One, being above all
things inconstant, never lets his servants know time or place until the
last moment, and that in some unlooked-for way.

At last, when she is quite tormented with anxiety lest she have
unwittingly angered her master, comes a stealthy clattering of wings
upon the thatch, and down through the hole that serves for chimney
rustles a black raven with fiery eyes. It flutters straight for the
witch's shoulder and there settles, whispering hoarsely in her ear,
while the light from its eyes throws her lean features, with their
twitching muscles, into pale relief against the darkness. Nodding eager
assent to the message, Mother Hackett hobbles to her bed, and, from a
safe hiding-place among the rustling pine-needles, draws out a phial.
Next she makes for the corner beside the hearth, and picks up the
broomstick leaning against the wall. The raven quits her shoulder for
the pillow, thence to watch her with its head at an approving angle.
She opens the phial and smears the contents on the broomstick, head and
handle. It is an ointment, and it shines with the phosphorescent light
that is born of corruption. Well it may, for it is compounded of black
millet and the dried powdered liver of an unbaptised child, just such
a one as now lies upon the witch's bed, with the grim raven gazing down
on it. The witch--deluded wretch--believes the ointment to have magic
powers; that, smeared upon her broomstick, it gives the senseless wood
volition and the power to carry her sky-high; or, if she swallow it,
that it will render her insensible to pain, so that the worst efforts
of the torturer and the executioner shall force her to confess nothing.
The Devil, her master, knows--none better--that no such potency is in
any ointment, but that his own hellish magic supports his minions in
the air and comes, and he so will, to their aid in time of trial. But
this he hides from them, so that in their folly they may be led to
murder babes--the sacrifice he loves above all other.

The witch takes a broken eggshell and smears it also with the ointment.
She goes to the bed and picks up the child, the broomstick hopping
after her across the floor. Being now ready to set out, she steps
astride the broom-handle, that holds itself aslant for her easier
mounting. She waves her hand to the attendant raven, and with a rush
that sends a spirtle of bright sparks up from the embers, she is
away--up the chimney, through the overhanging branches, through the
ragged clouds, and far on her journey under the stars. Yet, if any
should enter the witch's hut then or thereafter till the dawn, they
would find her sleeping peacefully upon the bed. The raven, having
carried their master's message, has this further duty: to take upon
himself the witch's shape until her return, lest any, finding her from
home, should scent out her errand.

The wind is from the East. The witch must steer across it, for the
Sabbath-General, as the corvine messenger has told her, is to be held
on a lonely peak of the Cevennes, in mid-France. Her task is not of
the easiest, for the gusts come fierce and sudden, and the broomstick
dips and leaps before them like a cockle-boat on a rough sea. The
witch's scanty locks and scantier clothing stream out almost at a right
angle, and once the baby in her arms raises its voice in a tiny wail
that would soften the heart of any but a servant of the Devil. Up here
the moonlight wells down unchecked, turning the clouds below into the
shifting semblance of snow mountains and lakes of silver. They open
out now and again at the wind's bidding to allow glimpses of the dark,
silent earth far down beneath.

So for a time--a little time, for Devil's messengers fly fast--the
witch drives onward in mid-air. At last the broomstick slackens speed,
seems to hesitate, circles twice or thrice, and then dives earthwards.
The hag alights upon the sea-shore, upon a pebbly beach whereon the
waves fling themselves in white fury at the lashings of the wind, now
grown so high that Mother Hackett can scarcely stand against it.
Whether because he foresees some chance of evil-doing, or from mere
inconstancy, for he works without method and against reason, the Devil
has ordered that she shall not cross the Channel on her broomstick.
She seizes the interval between two waves to launch the eggshell she
has brought with her, steps into it, raises the broomstick aloft as
sail or ensign, and puts out to sea in the teeth of the gale. The great
waves roar far above her head, in foaming whirlpools that might sink
a war-fleet, but the eggshell rides triumphantly among them, dancing
upon their crests and shipping never a drop of water on its passage.
Nor can the best efforts of the wind stay its speed. Only once does it
deviate from its course, when a straining ship, its spars and sails all
splintered and riven, drives through the mist to leeward. As she nears
it, the witch rises to her feet, throws out one skinny hand towards it,
and shrieks an incantation down the wind. A flicker of lightning shows
itself in the East, and a cloud drives over the face of the moon. When
its shadow is past, there is no more sign of the ship or its toiling
crew upon the lonely face of the waters. Mother Hackett mews gleefully
as she speeds Francewards.

Coming to where the low grey coast rises from the waves, she once
more sets herself astride the broomstick. As she speeds on, sky-high,
towards the meeting-place, she falls in with company bent on the same
errand. From all sides they come, converging to the goal, old, lean
hags like herself, women in the prime of life, young girls not yet out
of their teens. Some bear with them unweaned babes, others children of
a larger growth, yet others youths or grown men, as offerings to Satan.
These they carry pillion-wise before them, for in the Devil's kingdom
all is awry, imperfect, contrariwise to the ways of Christian folk.
Some of them are mounted on goats, some upon great toads, or flying
snakes, or reptiles of uncertain shape, or simple broomsticks, as fancy
has directed their imperious despot. One--a man--rides side-seated upon
a great fiery dragon, that in the distance glows like a newly-risen
star. He is a mighty sorcerer, one who commands Satan instead of
serving him, coming to the Sabbath for some reason of his own, and
mounted on a steed of his own providing.

The meeting-place of the Sabbath-General, as Satan, in mockery of
Christian ritual, chooses to call this foregathering of his servants,
is a bare peak in the loneliest part of the Cevennes. It stands a
little removed from the centre of a great mountain amphitheatre, and
just below the summit is a mountain tarn, crystal-pure and casting
back the starlight as peacefully as though there were no such things
as witch or warlock beneath God's Heaven. Yet it is not the first
time the same meeting-place has been chosen, for not a blade of grass,
not the humblest creeping plant, grows upon the sterile rocks. Every
growing thing withered away, root and branch, when last the forces of
Hell gathered here. So must the place remain, desert and bare, mute
witness of its desecration, until the Judgment Day.

The witches come skirling down from the sky like a flight of unclean
birds, circling above the crags, hovering to choose a settling-place
where no sharp-pointed rock shall gash their naked feet, chattering
shrilly the while. Those already arrived are seated in a wide circle
on a flat rock-ledge jutting from the mountain side. They are mostly
witches of the neighbourhood, who have come afoot and have set out
betimes lest they be detained upon the way. As more and more join
the circle you may find proof that they lie who declare the Devil's
servants mostly women. It is true that woman, by reason of the frailty
of her nature, seeks more often to pry into forbidden things, to her
own destruction, and thus there are many more witches than warlocks or
magicians. Yet of those gathered for this Sabbath-General, for every
witch there is one mortal man, to say nothing of demons; for while
some, as Mother Hackett, have come alone, others, being the younger
and fairer of the witches, have brought with them two or even three
youths or young men, ready to take service with the Evil One and cast
away their hope of salvation, as did our Father Adam, at the bidding
of these Delilahs. Thus it is that, in the unholy dances which are to
follow, every witch will have a man for her partner, save the most
favoured who dance with the superior demons, for thus the Devil will
have it.

Mother Hackett, when she dismounts from her broomstick, takes her
place beside one Luckie, a gossip of former Sabbaths, ill-favoured as
herself, who comes from the kingdom of Fife, where she is much feared
for the sudden tempests she raises when the fishing-fleets are sailing
homeward with full catches. Next to her is a younger witch, fair and
well-born, Sidonia by name, of a noble house in Mecklenburg. She is
a tall, pale girl, with hair the colour of ripe wheat, and grey-blue
eyes. She is held in high esteem by Satan, both for her beauty and
for the number of well-born youths she has delivered into his hands.
Next to her is a witch of Spain, beautiful also, though brown and with
black, beady eyes. Between these two there is little love lost, seeing
that they are women no less than witches, and either would do the other
a mischief could she compass it.

Though all those bidden have joined the circle, there is yet no sign of
the Devil's coming. The witches cease their clacking and scan the sky
impatiently, muttering curses against their master. Can it be that he
means to play them false, having bidden them merely for a jest and to
make a mock of them? It would not be for the first time--for his mind
is so crafty and so uncertain, his purpose so errant, that not the most
favoured of his ministers has any inkling of it.

Suddenly there is an eager rustling around the expectant circle. A
figure has appeared in the centre. But their relief fades into angry
disappointment. It is not the Devil himself. It is a small, mean,
inconsiderable devil, so inferior in the infernal hierarchy that he has
not even horns upon his head. The circle grows smaller as the witches
press towards him, buzzing with angry questions. They have no fear,
no respect for him; he is a servant like themselves. If he have been
deputed to represent his master, he must expect to pay dearly for the
honour. He scans the lowering faces anxiously and mutters apologies.
No doubt their Master is upon the way and will soon arrive. He himself
is but a poor devil, a little devil; they may be sure that he would
not think of putting a slight on witches of such eminence. But fair
words will not placate them. Already hands are raised to strike him,
already some of them are preparing to scratch him with the nails of
their little fingers, always worn long and sharp by witches, such being
one of the signs you may know them by. Already he has been tweaked
and buffeted as earnest of what he is to look for. But now another,
more dreadful shape looms up in the very centre of the circle, and the
angry witches fall back before it in grovelling terror. At first, seen
in the dim light of the waning moon, it is shapeless, inchoate. Slowly
it takes form before their eyes into the trunk of a great tree, with
tangled limbs stretching out from it. It has about it the suggestion
of a face, leering and horrible, with set features that half emerge
and half conceal themselves in the gnarling of the bark--such a face
as a man may see peering after him out of the darkness when he passes,
tip-toe, through the depths of an ancient forest at midnight. Before
it the witches make obeisance, turning their backs upon it and bowing
to the ground, in mockery of Christian reverence. When they turn
again the tree has changed into a goat, its eyes aflame with obscene
passion, and, even as they look, the goat fades into a lion with bloody
jaws. The lion fades in turn into a man, a comely man in all but his
expression, and his eyes, which, whatever his shape, are always those
of a goat, bestial and foul. He is dressed all in black, but his face
and hands are dull red--for his vitals are consuming in the flames of
Hell--and when he raises his hand, his wrist and forearm glow within
his cuff as though they were made of molten iron. On his left hand the
fingers are all grown together into one misshapen claw, for however
fair the human seeming into which the Devil moulds himself, you may
always know him for what he is, in that some part of him, an ear, a
foot, or a hand, is horribly misshapen.

Now at last, all being prepared, attendant imps pass round the circle,
checking the numbers of those present and who bears the Devil's
mark and who must still receive it, and who has carried out her
appointed task and who has failed. Returning, they whisper the tale
into their master's ear, who gibbers with delight and leaps into the
air and cracks his heels together, for there is nothing noble or of
dignity about him, being in all things mean and petty, a thing of
low vices rather than of heroic crimes. Thereafter he sits upon a
throne, seemingly of gold, that rises from the earth to receive him,
while his attendants hold aloft candles made of the fat of drowned
mariners, burning with a pale blue light. One by one he calls the
witches before him, calling them by nicknames, as "Old Toothless," or
"Wag-in-the-wind," or "Cozling," but never by the names given them in
Holy Baptism. And they, making obscene obeisance before his throne,
speak to him thuswise also, calling him "Monsieur," or "Grizzleguts,"
or other fouler names. Next, standing with her back towards the throne,
each in turn makes recital of her foul deeds since their last meeting:
how many of God's children she has ruined and undone, what evil spells
she has cast upon crops and bestial, what tempests she has raised, how
she has fared in furthering her master's kingdom. Those who have done
well Satan fondles and caresses, promising them great reward, but the
others he hands over to his imps for present punishment. Thus there
is one, plump and well-favoured, being a witch of Sweden, who, having
been given for her task that she shall bring a neighbour's son--a
rich young farmer--to her master's allegiance, has failed therein,
and that although granted extension of time for the emprise. Her the
Devil, losing all further patience, of which he has but little at the
best of times, marks out for punishment, and his demons, casting her
straightway to the ground, beat her with whips of living snakes and
scorpions, and bite and otherwise torment her with tooth and claw,
so that the blood runs from her in streams. And while she yells and
screams for mercy, flapping here and there upon the ground like a fish
upon a line, the whole assembly shakes with hideous laughter at the
grotesqueness of her agony.

Mother Hackett, her turn being come, rises eagerly, knowing that she
has done evil full measure since the last Sabbath. The waggoner's
child she hands to Gossip Luckie, the time for its presentation
being not yet come, and hobbles her fastest to her place before the
throne, puckering her old eyes beneath the glare from the surrounding
corpse-candles. It is for this that she has borne the hardships, the
hatred and persecution of her Christian neighbours, the starvation of
hunger and cold during the long winter months since the last Sabbath.
Her tale is of murrains cast upon a rich farmer's cattle, of a crop of
barley that has withered away beneath her spell, of a tempest raised
by her to unroof the priest's tithe-barn three parishes away, of the
digging up of bodies from the churchyard to grace the Sabbath banquet,
of three boys who, having stoned her, have ever since gone cross-eyed,
vomiting needles incessantly, and of the ship sunk in mid-Channel upon
her late crossing. Also there is the unbaptised child she has brought
with her, to be devoted to the Devil's service for all time. When her
tale is told she waits yet a long moment, expectant of praise and
reward. Praise indeed her master lavishes upon her, though he chides
her also for having brought him but a waggoner's brat in place of a
child well-born, for in them he delights most--and of future reward
great promise. But he speaks as one whose thoughts are elsewhere,
and his eyes--which are always the eyes of a lustful goat--wander to
where the beauteous Sidonia waits smiling for her turn. So Mother
Hackett must hobble back to her place in the circle, her heart full of
bitterness and disappointment, feeling that she has been tricked out
of her deserts, knowing that she must labour in ill-doing yet another
year before she can hope for the rich rewards promised her so many
weary years ago, yet still to look for. And she curses under her breath
as Sidonia passes in all the pride of her unholy beauty, going to where
the Evil One leans forward in his chair, his eyes glowing like hot
coals, and motions to her to come yet nearer as she tells with trills
of silvery laughter, that yet is altogether horrible, of three youths
she has bewitched, and how one has hanged himself, cursing the name
of God, and how another has murdered his own brother, and now lies in
durance awaiting death, and the third she has brought with her to the
Sabbath, to enter himself among the Devil's servants, abandoning his
hope of Heaven for her sake. Of her tale Satan loses no word, and when
she is done he clips her in his arms and fondles her and keeps her
beside him throughout what follows.

When all the witches have rendered account, it is the turn of the
victims they have brought with them, the unbaptised children first
and they of tender years. They are led or carried before the Devil's
throne, and stand there, curious and open-eyed, understanding nothing
of what is going forward, clustering together in a group, the elder
girls holding the infants in their arms and hushing them awkwardly
when they cry. The Evil One speaks to them, suiting his words to their
condition, his voice purring like a cat. He draws bright pictures of
the reward they may expect for absolute obedience--if they renounce
their kindred and, those of them who are baptised, their godfathers
and godmothers, and with them God and the Child Jesus. Some of the
elder among them demur at this, whereupon he reasons with them, his
voice still soft and cruel as a cat's, telling them that what they have
learned of Holy Writ is but an old wife's tale, and that there is no
God but he who speaks, being master of both worlds. Then his eyes blaze
brighter and his voice grows fierce and menacing, and he leads them to
the side of the mountain and shows them, far below, a dreadful chasm
with fierce flames leaping about it and grim fire-monsters lifting up
their open jaws from its centre. It is but a lying vision, conjured up
by his hellish arts; but how should such poor babes know false from
true? The witches gather round them and cozen and threaten, telling
them that if they refuse they will be surely cast into the flames,
but if they obey they shall have all that a child best loves, full
measure. So at last they do as they are bidden, and swear away their
young souls and their hope of salvation for ever and ever, and make
obeisance to Satan with obscene ceremonies of which they understand
nothing, doing all for fear of the witches who instruct them. When all,
even to the unweaned babes, are bound for ever to Satan's allegiance,
they are led away to the shore of the mountain tarn, whither come great
toads swimming up from its clear depths and clambering to the shore.
These the children are set to mind, being given little white switches
for that end--Satan promising that next year, if they have deserved
well, they shall be granted the full privileges of servants of Hell.
Childlike, when they have overcome their first horror of the hideous
toads, they make play-things of them, seeking to make them gallop with
the white switches, and, especially the boys, forgetting all that has
passed in the gleefulness of the moment.

Meanwhile the more mature recruits to Satan's army are called in turn
before him, to be examined in their love of evil, to make obeisance
and to receive his mark--invented by him in impious mockery of our
Saviour's wounds and the stigmata borne on their bodies by many of His
saints. All this to the accompaniment of rites so foul and bestial
that they may not be written down. And next, the present business
being disposed of, the whole crew falls a-dancing, men, women, and
imps together. Back to back the couples dance, for the most part
stark-naked, and some with black cats hanging from their necks or
waists, spitting and scratching, and some with hideous toads and
serpents pressed to their bosoms, and all capering and gesturing with
such lewd and obscene antics that the mind of man can scarcely follow
them. The imps who are of the number hold aloft their corpse-candles,
to light their paces, and in the middle of all sits the Devil blowing
upon a bag-pipe, sometimes in one form and sometimes in another, as the
whim takes him. Higher and higher they leap, and faster and faster grow
their steps, whirling hither and thither under the blue light of the
candles, spurred on by the droning of the infernal pipes, until they
fall a-gasping. When the last couple has ceased its pirouettings, the
Devil--being now again in the form of a man--lays aside his instrument
and leads them to where a banquet is prepared for them. The tables are
heaped high with all the delicacies of the earth, the rarest fruits,
the choicest meats, and the most costly wines, heaped upon golden
dishes that might ransom all the kings of Christendom. For attendants
there are demons of inferior rank, who have tricked themselves out
into the strangest shapes they can devise. Thus, one has a monstrous
nose, shaped like a flute, upon which he plays with his hands. Another
has sparks shooting from horns and tail, the which, as they fall upon
the table, turn into great beetles. Another, having neither arms nor
legs nor head, rolls like a wheel upon his belly, in the centre of
which blazes one great eye. Another is nought but a huge mouth, and
hops underneath the tables biting the ankles of the witches. While
yet another takes the shape of a beaker, whence pours sparkling wine
into the goblets of the guests. If they seek to drink, it turns to
burning pitch. Thus it is indeed with all the viands, for though they
seem all that the heart or belly of man can desire and of all things
plenty--saving only salt, for that Satan cannot abide, as recalling
the Last Supper upon earth of the Lord Christ--yet being tested they
are proved a mockery. For when the guests stretch out their hands for
what they most covet it vanishes from their eyes, and in its place is
corruption and rottenness, the reeking flesh of murderers and heretics
or of cattle that have died of a murrain, the entrails of reptiles
or the scrapings of middens, with, for drink, water in which drowned
suicides have rotted, and such-like. Some of those but newly entered
draw back in horror from such fare, whereat the more hardened mock at
them, falling upon it themselves with horrid zest.

Grown merry after such feasting, they fall a-rioting, jesting, and
playing after such wise as may not be told, until the time is come
for their next enterprise, what time the Devil toys with the most
well-favoured wantons among them. When at last the signal is given,
the whole hellish crew rise into the air again, their master leading
them, shrilling and squawking like a flight of wild geese across
the darkling sky. The Devil leads them to an old cathedral town, a
place of ancient towers and crumbling walls and tall, high-shouldered
houses that lean out over narrow lanes as if a-gossiping. Before the
great cathedral is a wide market-place, very busy in the day, but
silent now as a graveyard, with only now and then the creaking of
some wind-harried sign to tell of human energies. Four roads meet in
the centre of the market-place, and there the Evil One alights, his
ministers behind him, and there his throne is set up facing the portal
of the cathedral--for it is thus that Satan loves best to carry on
his mockery of Christian ritual. First is gone through a blasphemous
parody of Holy Baptism, toads taking the place of children. Each is
tricked out in a velvet suit of black or scarlet, with a bell tied to
each paw and one hung round its neck. An unfrocked priest, who has
been a miracle of shamelessness and is now sold to Satan, performs the
blasphemy, and the oldest and foulest witches stand as sponsors, vying
with each other in the lewdness of their responses. While this is going
forward a brace of night-rovers, intent upon a deed of sacrilege, come
creeping through the shadows round the cathedral walls, seeking to
force an entrance into the holy place. Their eyes and ears are at their
keenest, lest they be apprehended, but though they look right through
the crowd of demons and witches thronging the open market-place, they
yet see nothing of them--for, evil-doers though they be, they have not
yet lost their chance of salvation, and none but those irrevocably
sworn of Satan's following can see what befalls upon a Witches' Sabbath.

The christening of the toads being gone through, follows the yet more
blasphemous celebration of the Black Mass. The foresworn priest again
officiates, the imps, witches, and demons acting as deacons, acolytes,
or worshippers, all impiously mimicking the servants of God. In place
of the Host is exalted a black wafer, cut in the form of a triangle,
and the whole service of the Mass is gone through backwards from end
to beginning. The onlookers also make their obeisances backwards, with
lewd gesture not forgotten, towards where the father of all evil sits
grinning and mowing upon his throne over against the cathedral door.
Yet are they not permitted to finish their blasphemies, for even as
the false priest makes to administer the wafer to an imp, who receives
it, for the greater mockery, standing upon his head, the first pale
shadow of the dawn creeps up the eastern sky. Seeing it, a lusty cock,
roosting in some farmyard beyond the city walls, welcomes it with
shrill crowings. The Devil's brood break off and listen fearfully,
for Chanticleer is a servant of God, and held in awe by all demons,
witches, and sorcerers as the herald of God's daylight. A rival
bird takes up the challenge, and it is echoed far and wide over the
countryside. The Evil One waits no longer, but sinks at once, with
his throne, downwards through the cobble-stones to his abiding-place,
followed by his attendant demons. The witches and sorcerers of the
company tarry not, but cast themselves afloat upon the air, wasting no
time or breath upon their farewells lest daylight surprise them ere
they can reach their homes and all their wickedness be made clear.

Mother Hackett, among the rest, throws herself astride her broom-handle
and sails off down the wind. On this her return she wastes no time
at the sea-coast, but shoots onward high in the air, through the
increasing pallor of the morning. Over sea and down she flies, and,
dropping like a stone into the dingle, enters her cottage by the
chimney, unseen even by the earliest ploughman. At her coming the
expectant demon in her shape rises from the bed and takes again the
semblance of a raven. A few words of greeting and inquiry, and it makes
its exit by the road it came, flying off heavily across the fields,
regardless of the daylight, for who, seeing a raven fly towards the
sea, would think of sorcery or witchcraft? Who, again, entering her
humble cot and seeing there a poor old woman sleeping on a bed of
poverty would recognise in her a foul witch, forward in all wickedness
and a most potent agent of her master Satan. For so cunningly do these
devilish hags, aided by their master's arts, conceal their exits and
their entrances, their spells and incantations, that there be many
ignorant men who, openly flouting Holy Writ, declare, even in these
enlightened days, that there is no such thing as witchcraft or sorcery,
and that they who seek out witches and slay them are no better than
cruel murderers of poor helpless old women. Such are the craft and
malice of Satan and the folly of mankind.




CHAPTER III

THE ORIGINS OF THE WITCH


The witch, in the broader sense of the word, may be said to have
existed ever since mankind first evolved an imagination, and may be
expected to expire only with the death of the last woman. Given the
supernatural, and sorcery must follow in some shape or other as its
corollary. Whence also the witch is as ubiquitous as she is enduring.
Under some form or other she exists, and has existed, in every quarter
of the globe; she is as familiar to the English peasant as to the West
African, in South America as in Japan. Her attributes vary, and have
varied, with the racial temperament and the religious conceptions
of her worshippers and persecutors, as widely as do, and have done,
their gods. But it was left for mediæval Christianity to give her the
definite shape in which she is now most universally recognised, and it
is to the Christian ideal of celibacy that she owes, if indirectly,
the more obscene, and latterly the more grotesque, of her attributes,
lifting her at first to an evil equality with the horned Devil of the
Middle Ages, degrading her ultimately to the "horrid old witch" of
nursery legend.

It is a far cry from this same "horrid old witch" to the pagan
divinity, but there is no break in the long pedigree. It may be traced
still further through the mists of antiquity--to the earliest days of
human motherhood. Only, as between goddess and witch, we are confronted
with a Darwinian problem. Is the witch indeed daughter of the goddess,
or are both descended from a common ancestress? To my mind, the latter
is the more correct line of descent, with the pagan priestess as
connecting link.

"To one wizard, ten thousand witches," quotes Michelet from a forgotten
writer of the days of Louis Treize; and throughout all the history
of sorcery women have formed the majority of its practitioners. Our
forefathers attributed this to the weakness of womankind, always
curious to probe the mysteries of the Unknown, always prone to fall
into the snare of evil. A more charitable--and correcter--explanation
would be found in the greater quickness of her perceptions. If Eve
first gave the apple to Adam, she gave with it the future of civilised
humanity. The first mother gave birth to twin-daughters, the goddess
and the witch, and from one or other of them came the impetus which has
carried mankind to its present stage of progress, and will carry it
yet nearer towards Heaven.

The primitive father was an animal, with potentialities--among animals
without them. His intellect was concentrated in his activities, in
providing for the material needs of himself and his family. His
position towards his wife was very much what satirists would have us
believe is that of the American business man to-day. His laborious
days were spent in tracking his prey through the forest, his leisure
in sleeping, eating, and digesting. The mother, on the other hand, was
bound to the home by reason of her motherhood. Less active, she was
more contemplative, noting in the order of events the best means of
preservation for the small pink thing that could not live without her
care, her mind always alert to the exigencies of the moment. Thus she
acquired knowledge of things beneficent or harmful, of the food most
apt for its nourishment, of the herbs growing around the clearing best
fitted to cure its infantile complaints. She experimented, cautiously
but continuously, and with each recurrent need she added a little to
her small stock of wisdom. Small in itself, but vast in proportion
to that of men or childless women. Little by little she "walked her
hospital"; little by little she learnt the relative value of her
simple potions, to whom they should be given, and how, and when. To
the primitive mind this was cause for wonder, as indeed it is, almost
as wonderful as the first smile of the first baby. Pain can no longer
run riot unchecked. If it have not yet found its mistress, at least
a protest has been entered against it--reason not only for joy and
wonder, but for respect and gratitude--even perhaps for worship.

Whatever his divinity, Man worships himself. In every form of religion
the worshipped tends to become confused with the worshipper. Man cannot
escape his own environment. The thunderstorm frightens him; there must
be a storm-demon. What is that demon but another man like himself,
though uglier and wickeder and very much more powerful? Such a demon
must be flattered and propitiated as an angry man of might must be. But
a Primitive with his living to make cannot spare the time necessary
to propitiate a worldful of demons. He deputes the duty to a weaker
neighbour, one who sits at home, engaging for his own part to find
food for both. Whence the first priestess--from whom later descends
the first priest. For who so apt at propitiation as she who can cajole
that most domesticated of demons, the ever-present Pain. So, later,
when the propitiation of Evil gives place to the invocation of good,
who so worthy of honour, which is to say of worship, as she who, in the
dawning of the race, first relieved poor humanity of its bodily ills?
Goddess, priestess, White Witch and Black--all are but variations on
that oldest and most beautiful of themes, Motherhood.

To return to the first house-wife. Throughout her life she adds always
a little to her store of natural knowledge, and when she dies she
bequeaths it to her daughters. They in turn add to it until the time
comes when to the cure of bodies is added that of minds. For Man's
nascent mind begins to trouble him almost as much as does his body.
Already the eternal problem of why and wherefore raises its head;
already he begins his age-long struggle with the inevitable. That "all
that is, is good" does not commend itself to Pre-historic Man. He
knows so much better. He must often go hungry, his cattle die, drought
destroys his meagre crops, his neighbour robs him of his war-spoil.
He appeals to the woman, who thinks so much, for a way out. Cannot
she, who with her potions drove the pain out of his body, help him in
this also? Can she not cure his cattle? Can she not reason with the
delinquent rain-demon, or, by making a little rain herself, move him
to emulation? Best of all, can she not, out of the plenitude of her
wisdom, suggest some means of outwitting that treacherous neighbour? He
will reward her handsomely, especially for this last.

It is at this point that the priestess and the witch come to the
crossing of the ways, henceforward to follow divergent paths. The one
sister, from whom is to be born the devout priestess, is ready to do
all that she can. She invokes the cattle-demon, the rain-demon; she,
no more than the man, has any doubt of their invocability, but if they
refuse to answer it must be because they are angry. She cannot make it
rain if the demon gainsay her prayer. She is honest, acknowledging her
inferiority to the supernatural. Only she claims to understand more
than most the best way to approach it.

Consider the other woman--the ancestress of the witch, in the
opprobrious sense. She knows very well that she cannot make rain.
Probably she has made the experiment already. But--such faith in her
power is tempting--so are the gifts thus easy to be earned. The man
believes in her--almost she begins to believe in herself. Perhaps
she tries to persuade herself that she may succeed this time. She
is weatherwise, and she reads in natural signs the probability that
rain may shortly be expected. If it should not--well, she must take
precautions against incurring blame. She must impose conditions, and
any failure must be set down to their non-fulfilment. There is a
very pleasant sense of power in gulling the overgrown baby who is so
ready to be gulled. She accepts the trust, commands the rain-demon
to let down his showers. Her reading of the signs is justified--the
expected rain comes. Her reputation is assured--until belief in the
supernatural shall be no more. Her daughter and her grand-daughters
inherit her claims. They also command the storm, using the same form
of words. Possibly they are themselves deceived--believing that there
is some virtue in the form of their mother's words, now become an
incantation. From the first claim to power over the elements, to the
finished sorceress, and thence to the "horrid old witch" of fairy
legend, is but a matter of regular evolution.

Just as the priestess was the mother of the priest, so the wizard is
born of the witch. Man, though he start later--very much as the boy
is slower in development than is his sister--is not content always
to remain second in the race for knowledge. For a time--perhaps for
long centuries--he has been content to leave things intellectual to
his womenfolk. But when he starts he is not content to stay upon
the threshold of knowledge, as woman, who has approached it only
from necessity, has done. One day a male iconoclast rebels, pitting
his awakening intellect against the woman's inherited reputation.
Victorious, he yet trembles at his victory, while all Palæolithia
awaits the angry fire from Heaven. But nothing happens. No lightning
strikes him; no swift disease destroys him, or his children, or his
cattle. A new era has begun--the wizard places himself beside the
witch, slowly but surely to elbow her into the second place.

As the slow centuries pass society has been gradually forming and
shaping itself. In his search for a civilisation Man has left the
secluded cave wherein he wrung the empire of the world from the jaws
of the cave-bear and the scythe-toothed tiger. He has built himself
homes and collected them into villages; from the scattered family he
has evolved the tribe, and from the tribe the nation. Having learned
his own power when buttressed upon that of his neighbours, he is slowly
broadening and extending it until it is little inferior to that of the
divinities before whom it pleases him to tremble. He--or Nature for
him--chooses out rulers, who become his gods in all but divinity; and
his respect for them, if less absolute, is more immediate than for his
gods. Government, making all things possible, becomes an accomplished
fact.

Government, once instituted, loses no time in measuring itself
against Heaven. In one form or other the conflict between Church and
State--disguise it as men may--has lasted from the beginning, and
must last as long as both survive. That ideal which reached the point
nearest of attainment in the theoretic constitution of the Holy Roman
Empire, of two rulers, co-existent and co-equal, governing one the
spiritual and one the material empire of the world, was in the very
nature of things doomed to remain an ideal. Either God or Man must be
first. With their struggles for the mastery the fortunes of the witch,
as of all exponents of the supernatural, were intimately bound up.

At first sheltering itself beneath the wings of the spiritual power,
the material flourished--at its protector's expense. The realm of
Nature seemed at first so inconsiderable compared to that of the
supernatural, that he were a bold iconoclast who dared compare them.
Only, the King was always in the midst of his people; the god, century
by century, retreated further into the unscaleable skies. Slowly the
civil power emancipated itself from the tutelage of the spiritual--as
it is still doing in our own time--slowly and with many falterings and
many backward glances, asserting itself in prosperity, appealing for
help in adversity, retreating often, but never so far as it advanced.

With the first introduction of civil government the witch and the
priestess finally part company, to range themselves henceforward
upon opposite sides. It is true that as religion follows religion
the priestess of the former era often becomes the witch of its
successor, thereby only accentuating the distinction. For, in the
unceasing efforts to arrange a _modus vivendi_ between the human
and the supernatural worlds, the priestess accommodates herself to
circumstances--the witch defies them. The priestess, acknowledging
her own humanity, claims only to interpret the wishes of the god, to
intercede with him on behalf of her fellow-men. The witch, staunch
Tory of the old breed, claims to be divine, in so far as she exercises
divine power unamenable to human governance, and thus singles herself
out as one apart, independent of civil and ecclesiastical powers
alike--and as such an object of fear and of suspicion. Even so she
is still respectable, suspect indeed, but not condemned. The public
attitude towards her is variable; she is alternately encouraged and
suppressed, venerated and persecuted--and through all she flourishes,
now seductive as Circe, now hag-like as was Hecate.

Ages pass, empires flourish and decay, and slowly a great change is
coming over society. Unrest is in the air; old systems and old creeds
are dying of inertia, and men look eagerly for something to take
their place. The spirit of individual liberty steals round the world,
whispering in all men's ears. The slave, toiling at the oar, hears
them, though he dare not listen, and hugs them in his heart--and a
heresy, threatening the very foundations of society, spreads far and
wide. Is it just possible that men are not born slave or master by
divine decree?

The First Socialist is born in the East. He and His disciples preach a
creed so blasphemous, so incompatible with the rights of property, that
it becomes a sacred duty, if vested interests are to be preserved, to
crucify Him as an encouragement to others. He proclaims, in a word,
that all men are equal. It is well for Christianity that He adds the
qualification, "In the sight of God," or how could either slave or
master believe in anything so contrary to the senses' evidence? Vested
interests notwithstanding, the new creed spreads, as any creed so
comforting to the great majority, the downtrodden and oppressed, is
bound to spread. But, though it preached the acceptable doctrines of
liberty, equality, and fraternity, Christianity introduced with them
sin into the world. All men might be equal in the sight of God, but
they were all equally sinners. Humility and self-abasement were to take
the place of the old pagan joyousness. To the Christian--to the Early
Christian, at any rate--the world ceased to be man's inheritance, as
Heaven was that of a congerie of shifting divinities-an inheritance the
enjoyment of which was as blameless as it was natural. It was become a
place of discipline and education, a hard school designed to prepare
him for a glorious future, and one in which only the elect were to
share. Everything that did not actively help towards that end was evil;
all who did not work towards that end were evil-doers. The pagan and
his easy-going paganism were alike accursed and tolerance a sin.

The contest between two such schools of thought--however long drawn
out--could have but one conclusion. Capricious persecutions, on civil
rather than religious grounds, gave the iconoclasts the one remaining
impetus needed to snatch the sceptre of the world. Successful, they
persecuted in their turn, systematically and with the thoroughness born
of conscious virtue. In spite--or because of--such attempts to stamp
out pagan and paganism together, the old order still survived in secret
long after the known world was officially Christianised. Naturally
enough, the Christian could only suppose that such criminal persistence
was the direct work of that Evil One whom he first had exploited. Pagan
rites were nothing more nor less to him than Devil worship, those who
practised them the direct representatives of Satan. Some of the pagan
gods had been pressed into the service of Christianity as saints, their
festivals as saints' days. Those that remained were classed together,
with their ministers and attributes, under the generic heading of
Magic, shunned and feared at first, but as the Church more and more
stepped into the shoes of the civil power, warred upon without mercy.

Faced by such forcible arguments for conversion, the Pagan witch was
not long in adopting the Christian Devil as a more potent protector
than the old, easy-going gods who had formerly peopled the supernatural
world. Pagan or nominal Christian, she was equally anathema to the
Church, if only that she was consistently Protestant, claiming to
hold direct communication with the Unseen quite regardless of the
proper ecclesiastical channels. And by this very independence her
hold upon the imagination of her neighbours continued to increase as
Christianity progressed towards universal empire. The very definite
pronouncements of the Church against witches, witchcraft, and all kinds
of magic served to foster the general belief in their powers. What was
so forcibly condemned must of necessity exist. There was, moreover, a
certain satisfaction in this same tangibility. It simplified, smoothed
out the path of virtue. With witchcraft about, your duty was plain and
your task easy. You had but to mention a holy name, to make a sacred
sign, to sprinkle a little holy water, and victory was assured. If all
assaults of the devil were so straightforward and so vincible, the path
to Heaven were broad and smooth indeed.

It was, perhaps, the popular sense of victorious ability against
her spells which protected the witch, _per se_, against over-severe
persecution until towards the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Absolute confidence in the power to suppress an evil diminishes the
urgency for its suppression. Here and there a witch was executed,
local persecutions of inconsiderable extent occurred, but for general
holocausts we must wait until the more enlightened times of a James I.
or a Louis XIV. The witch of the Dark Ages might count upon a life of
comparative security, sweetened by the offerings of those who, pining
for present joys, acted upon the advice of Omar Khayyam rather than
following that of their ghostly advisers. Meanwhile, however, a mass of
tradition and precedent was growing up, to be put to deadly purpose in
the animadversions of learned sixteenth and seventeenth century writers
upon the vile and damnable sin of witchcraft.

By the eleventh century the witch was firmly identified, in the popular
as well as the ecclesiastical mind, as a woman who had entered upon
a compact with Satan for the overthrowing of Christ's kingdom. The
popular conception of her personality had also undergone a change.
By the twelfth century there was no more question of her as a fair
enchantress--she was grown older and uglier, poorer and meaner, showing
none of the advantages her compact with the Evil One might have been
expected to bring in its train.

The increasing tendency towards dabbling in things forbidden brought
about greater severity in its repression, but it was not until the
days of Innocent VIII., when witchcraft was officially identified with
heresy, that the period of cruel persecution may be said really to
have begun. Sorcery in itself was bad enough; associated with heresy
no crime was so pernicious and no punishment too condign, especially
when inflicted by the Holy Inquisition. The inquisitorial power was
frequently misused; the fact that the possessions of the accused became
forfeit to her judges when tried in an ecclesiastical court may seem to
the sceptic to provide ample reason why the ecclesiastical authorities
undertook so many more prosecutions than did the civil. But of the
absolute sincerity with which all classes set themselves to stamp out
so dreadful a crime, the portentous and voluminous writings of the
period leave no doubt whatever. Catholic and, after the Reformation,
Protestant, rich and poor, patriot and philanthropist alike, vied with
each other in the enthusiasm with which they scented out their prey,
and the pious satisfaction with which they tortured helpless old women
to the last extremity in the name of the All-Merciful.

From the fourteenth century onwards the type of recognised witch varies
only in detail. Though not invariably she is commonly the conventional
hag. If young, she has been led astray by a senior, or taken to the
Sabbath in childhood under constraint--which was not, however, regarded
as a valid defence in time of trial. Many such were executed in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, in many cases mere children. But
it was the toothless hag whose mumblings held the public ear and became
acknowledged as the truest type. Even when men ceased to fear her she
lost nothing of her grotesque hideousness to the childish mind, and
as such has become finally enshrined in the nursery lore of Europe.
As such, also, I have endeavoured to reconstruct her in her habit as
she lived in the eyes of her mediæval contemporaries elsewhere in this
volume.




CHAPTER IV

THE HALF-WAY WORLDS.


Having decided, very early in his earthly career, to acknowledge a
supernatural world, Man promptly set to work to people it after his
own image. One not providing scope for his quickening imagination, he
added another to it, supplementing the heavenly by the infernal, good
by evil--if, indeed, as is more probable, he did not rather deduce good
out of evil. But just as there are many stages between high noon and
midnight, so to the world he saw and those he imagined he added yet
others which should act as their connecting links. Between the divine
and the human he placed the semi-divine, between the human and the
infernal the half-human. He mated God with Man and both with Devil, and
dowered them with a numerous family, God-Man, Man-Devil, God-Devil,
and so on, until the possibilities of his earlier imagination were
exhausted. Each has his own world--and the stars cannot rival them in
number; each world has its cities and its nations, differing in all
things save one--that all alike feel, act, think, after the manner of
mankind. So is it, again, with the other universe of half-way worlds,
filling the space between the human and the bestial--centaur, satyr,
were-wolf, or mermaid, all alike reflect the human imagination that has
evolved them--to nondescript bodies they unite the reflected mind of
man.

Conforming to the general rule, the witch is but one dweller in a
half-way world that is thickly populated and in itself forms one of an
intricate star-group. Externally at least, its orbit nearly coincides
with that of our human world, in that its inhabitants are for the most
part of human origins acquiring those attributes which raise them
above--or degrade them below--the commonalty subsequently to their
birth. This not invariably--nothing is invariable to the imagination.
Thus the fairies, although not human beings, may yet be witches--demons
also, unless many grave and reverend authorities lie. Under certain
conditions they may even become human beings, as mermaids may--many
a man has married a fairy wife--and it is an open question whether
they have altogether lost their hope of Heaven, as witches invariably
have. As witches, they must be regarded as belonging to the White,
or beneficent, type; for although, as Mercutio has told us, they may
sometimes play unkind pranks upon the idle or undeserving, they have
always a kindly eye for the virtuous, and frequently devote themselves
altogether to good works, as in the case of Lob-lie-by-the-Fire, and
others equally difficult to catalogue. For the more we investigate
the various orbits of the half-way worlds, the more do we find them
inextricably interwoven. The Western Fairy or Oriental Djinn may
partake of half-a-hundred different natures--may pervade half the
imaginative universe--and as does the Fairy, so does the Witch. Hecate,
a goddess, was yet no less notorious a witch than was Mother Shipton,
a human being of no elevated rank. The were-wolf, though usually of
human parentage, might yet have been born a wolf and obtained the power
of taking human shape from some subsequent external cause. The Beast
in the fairy story, though at heart a youthful Prince of considerable
attractions, once transmogrified might have remained a Beast for good
and all but for his fortunate encounter with Beauty's father. Who shall
say exactly in which world to place, how to class beyond possibility of
confusion, Circe--witch, goddess, and woman, and the men she turned to
swine--or the fairies and mermaids who have, usually for love, divested
themselves of their extra-human attributes and become more or less
permanently women--or those human children who, stolen by the fairies,
have become fairies for good and all--or how distinguish between all
of these and the ladies with romantic names and uncertain aspirates who
deal out destinies in modern Bond Street.

Even if we agree to confine the witch to the narrowest limits, to
regard her, that is to say, as primarily a human being and only
incidentally possessed of superhuman powers and attributes, there still
remain many difficulties in the way of exact classification. Her powers
are varied, and by no means always common to every individual. Or,
again, she has the power to turn herself corporeally into a wolf or a
cat--which brings her into line with the were-wolf, just as the cat or
wolf may under certain circumstances transform themselves, permanently
or otherwise, into a human witch. She may acquire the mind of a wolf
without its body; on the other hand, many a beautiful princess has
been transformed into a white doe by witchcraft. So with her male
colleagues--sorcerer, magician, wizard, warlock, male-witch, diviner,
and the rest of the great family. We may reach firm ground by agreeing
to recognise only such as are of human origin, though by so doing we
rule out many of the most eminent--the great Merlin himself among them.
But even so, it is impossible to dogmatise as to where the one begins,
the other ends. There have been many male-witches--more particularly in
Scotland--as distinguished from wizards. Wizard and warlock again, if
it be safe to regard them as distinct species, though differing from
magician and sorcerer, are yet very difficult of disentanglement. The
position is complicated by the fact that, just as a man may be clerk,
singer, cricketer, forger, philanthropist, and stamp-collector at one
and the same time, so might one professor of the Black Art take half a
dozen shapes at the same time or spread over his career.

There is indeed but one pinnacle of solid rock jutting out from the
great quagmire of shifting uncertainty--witch, wizard, were-wolf,
or whatsoever their sub-division--one and all unite in one great
certainty: that of inevitable damnation. Whatever their form, however
divergent their powers, to that one conclusion they must come at last.
And thus, and only thus, we may know them--posthumously.

It is true that certain arbitrary lines may be drawn to localise the
witch proper, even though the rules be chiefly made up of exceptions.
Thus she is, for the most part, feminine. The Scots male-witch, and
those elsewhere occurrent in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
might as correctly be termed wizards or warlocks, for any absolute
proof to the contrary. The witch, again, has seldom risen to such
heights in the profession as have her male competitors. The magician
belongs, as we have seen, to a later stage of human development than
does the witch, but, once evolved, he soon left her far behind; it
is true that he was able to avail himself of the store of knowledge
by her so slowly and painfully acquired. With its aid he soon raised
himself to the highest rank in the profession--approaching it from the
scientific standpoint, and leaving her to muddle along empirically
and by rule of thumb. Nor was he content until he had made himself
master of the Devil--using Satan and all his imps for his own private
ends--while the less enterprising witch never rose to be more than the
Devil's servant, or at best his humble partner in ill-doing.

The Magician, whatsoever his own private failings, has certainly
deserved well of posterity. Just as the quack and the Bond Street sybil
are representatives of the witch in the direct line, so, from the
alchemist and the sorcerer are descended the great scientists of our
own day--an impious brood indeed, who deny that their own father was
aught but an impostor and a charlatan. The proprietor of, let us say,
"Dr. Parabole's Pellets," is own brother--illegitimate though he be--to
the discoverer of the Röntgen ray. The researches of the old-time
sorcerer into the Forbidden, whatever their immediate profit, at least
pointed out the direction for more profitable researches. Merlin,
Cornelius Agrippa, or Albertus Magnus, had they been born in our day,
would certainly have achieved the Fellowship of the Royal Society--and
with good reason. It is to the search after the philosopher's stone and
the elixir vitæ that we owe the discovery of radium. It was only by
calling in the aid of the Devil that mankind acquired the prescience of
a God.

The witch proper, on the other hand, did not trouble herself with
research work. Having attained that dominion over her fellows dear
to the heart of woman, she was content to rest upon her laurels.
Certain incantations or charms, learned by rote, the understanding
of the effect and cure of certain poisons--these were sufficient
stock-in-trade to convince her neighbours, and perhaps herself.
Doubtless Dr. Parabole, however aware in the beginning of the
worthlessness of his own pills, comes after years of strenuous
advertising to believe in them. He may stop short of taking them
himself--at least he will prescribe them to his dearest friend in
absolute good faith. So with the witch, his grandmother. Many, no
doubt, of the millions offered up as sacrifice to the All-Merciful,
were guiltless even in intention; many more allowed themselves to be
convinced of their own sinfulness by the suspicions of their neighbours
or the strenuous arguments of their judge-persecutors; many were
hysterical, epileptic, or insane. But the larger proportion, it is
scarcely too much to say, only lacked the power while cherishing the
intention--witches they were in everything but witchcraft.

We thus may briefly state the difference between the witch and the
magician as that the one professed powers in which she might herself
believe or not believe, inherited or received by her, and by her
passed on to her successors without any attempt to augment them. The
magician, on the other hand, was actually a student of the mysteries
he professed, and thus, if we leave aside his professional hocus-pocus
devilry, cannot be considered as altogether an impostor. With the
alchemist and the astrologer, more often than not combining the three
characters in his one person, he stands at the head of the profession
of which the witch--male or female--brings up the rear. Another
distinction is drawn by sixteenth-century authorities between witches
and conjurers on the one side, and sorcerers and enchanters on the
other--in that while the two first-mentioned have personal relations
with the Devil, their colleagues deal only in medicines and charms,
without, of necessity, calling up apparitions at all. It is to be noted
in this connection that the sorcerer often leads Devil and devilkin by
the nose, in more senses than one--devils having extremely delicate
noses, and being thus easily soothed and enticed by fumigations, a
peculiarity of which every competent sorcerer avails himself. Thus,
Saint Dunstan, and those other saints of whom it is recorded that
they literally led the Devil by the nose, using red-hot pincers for
the purpose, were but following the path pointed out for them by
professors of the Art Magical.

Between the witch and the conjurer a wide gulf is fixed. The conjurer
coerces the Devil, against his infernal will, by prayers and the
invocation of God's Holy Name; the witch concludes with him a business
agreement, bartering her body, soul, and obedience for certain more or
less illusory promises. The conjurer is almost invariably beneficent,
the witch usually malignant, though the White Witch exercises her
powers only for good, if sometimes with a certain mischievousness,
while the Grey Witch does good or evil as the fancy takes her, with a
certain bias towards evil. The wizard, again, though often confused
with the male-witch, is in reality a practitioner of great distinction,
possessing supernatural powers of his own attaining, and, like the
magician, constraining the Devil rather than serving him. He also is
capable of useful public service, so much so indeed that Melton, in
his "Astrologastra," published in 1620, includes what may pass as a
Post Office Directory of the wizards of London. He enumerates six of
importance, some by name, as Dr. Forman or "Young Master Olive in
Turnbull Street," others by vaguer designations, as "the cunning man of
the Bankside" or "the chirurgeon with the bag-pipe cheek." He includes
one woman in the list, probably a White Witch.

The Diviners, or peerers into the future, form yet another sub-section
of dabblers in the supernatural--and one which numbers very many
practitioners even in our own day. Naturally enough, seeing that
the desire to influence the future is the obvious corollary to that
of knowing it, the part of diviner was more often than not doubled
with that of witch or sorcerer. Divination is an art of the most
complicated, boasting almost as many branches as medicine itself,
each with its select band of practitioners. Different nations, again,
favoured different methods of divining--thus the Hebrews placed most
confidence in Urim and Thummim; the Greeks were famous for axinomancy,
the machinery for which consisted of an axe poised upon a slate or
otherwise handled. This method was as apt for present as for future
needs, being especially potent in the discovery of criminals. Crime
detection by divination has been--and remains--greatly favoured in the
East. The Hindus, in particular, place greater reliance upon it than
upon the more usual methods of our Occidental police, and many stories
are told of the successes achieved by their practitioners. Nor is this
surprising in cases where the diviner shows such shrewd knowledge of
human nature as in that, oft-quoted, whereby all those under suspicion
of a theft are ranged in a row and presented with mouthfuls of grain,
with the assurance that the guilty man alone will be unable to swallow
it--a phenomenon which nearly always does occur if the thief be among
those present--and not infrequently when he is not! This and similar
stories, though scarcely falling under the heading of divination
proper, are so far pertinent to the subject that they suggest the
explanation of many of its more remarkable successes. Tell a nervous
man that he is destined to commit suicide upon a certain day, and,
granted that he has any faith in your prophetic powers, the odds are
that he will prove the correctness of your prophecy. We may compare
with this the powerful influence of "tapu" upon the South Sea Island
mind. Many natives have died--as has been vouched for by hundreds of
credit-worthy witnesses--for no more tangible reason than fear at
having incurred the curse of desecrating something placed under its
protection. It may be added that the Islanders, observing that white
men do not suffer the same fate, account for it by declaring that the
White Man's Gods, being of a different persuasion from their own,
protect their own votaries.

Divination proper takes almost innumerable forms. Without entering
too closely upon a wide subject, a few examples may be profitably
quoted. Among the best known are Belomancy, or divination by the flight
of arrows, a form much favoured by the Arabs; Bibliomancy (of which
the "Sortes Virgilianæ" is the most familiar example); Oneiromancy
(or divination by dreams, honoured by Archbishop Laud and Lord Bacon
among others); Rhabdomancy (by rods or wands. The "dowser," or
water-finder, whose exploits have aroused so much attention of recent
years, is obviously akin to the Rhabdomancist). Crystallomancy, or
crystal-gazing, was first popularised in this country by the notorious
Dr. Dee, and still finds many votaries in Bond Street and elsewhere.
Hydromancy, or divination by water, is another variety much favoured
by the Bond Street sybil, a pool of ink sometimes taking the place of
the water. Cheiromancy, or Palmistry, most popular of any, may possess
some claim to respect in its least ambitious form as a means towards
character reading. Divination by playing-cards, another popular method,
is, needless to say, of later, mediæval origin. The Roman augurs, who,
as every schoolboy knows, deduced the future from the flight of birds,
provide yet another example of this universal pastime, perhaps the
least harmful sub-section of the Black Arts.

Among the most brilliant luminaries of the half-way worlds are
those twin-stars inhabited by the Alchemist and the Astrologer. The
pseudo-science of star-reading may be supposed to date from the first
nightfall--and may thus claim a pedigree even older, if only by a
few months or years, than that of Magic proper. Alchemy, despite
its Moorish name, has a scarcely less extended history. It owes its
birth--traditionally, at any rate--to the same Egyptian Man-God who
first introduced witchcraft and magic in their regularised forms to an
expectant world. Its principles having been by him engraved in Punic
characters upon an emerald, were discovered in his tomb by no less a
person than Alexander the Great. It should perhaps be added that doubts
have been cast upon this resurrection. However that may be, it was much
practised by the later Greeks in Constantinople from the fifth century
A.D. until the Moslem conquest of the city. From them the Arabs adopted
it, gave it the name by which it has ever since been known, and became
the most successful of its practitioners.

To attempt any close study of the great alchemists were foreign to my
present purpose, and would entail more space than is at my disposal.
At the same time, so close was their connection, in the eyes of the
vulgar, so intimate their actual relationship with witchcraft, that it
is impossible altogether to ignore them. What is more, they lend to the
witch a reflected respectability such as she can by no means afford to
forgo. They held, in fact, in their own day, much the same position
as do the great inventors and scientists of to-day. Mr. Edison and
Mr. Marconi, had they been born ten centuries since, would certainly
have taken exalted rank as alchemists or magicians. As it is, in ten
centuries a whole world of magical romance will have been very likely
woven about their names, even if they have not been actually exalted to
divinity or inextricably confused with Lucifer and Prometheus. While
some of their predecessors may have actually claimed power over the
supernatural--either in self-deception or for self-aggrandisement--the
great majority undoubtedly had such claims thrust upon them, either
by their contemporaries or by posterity, and would have themselves
claimed nothing higher than to be considered students of the unknown.
The Philosopher's Stone and the Elixir Vitæ may have served indeed
as the ideal goal of their researches, much as they do under their
modern form of the Secret of Life in our own time; but their actual
discoveries, accidental and incidental though they may have been, were
none the less valuable. After such a lapse of time it is as difficult
to draw the line between the alchemist-scientist and the charlatan as
it will be a century hence to distinguish the false from the true among
the "inventors" and "scientists" of to-day, so absolutely do the mists
of tradition obscure the face of history. Leaving out of the question
such purely legendary figures as Merlin, we may class them under three
headings, and briefly consider one example under each. In the first
may be placed the more or less mythical figures of Gebir and Albertus
Magnus, both of whom, so far as it is now possible to judge, owe their
ambiguous reputations entirely to the superstitions of their posterity.

Such a personage as the great Arabian physician Gebir, otherwise
Abou Moussah Djafar, surnamed Al Sofi, or the Wise, living in the
eighth century, was certain to gain the reputation of possessing
supernatural power, even had he not busied himself in the discovery
of the Philosopher's Stone and the Elixir. Though he found neither,
he yet in seeking them made other discoveries little less valuable,
and it is scarcely too much to say, made their discovery possible in
later centuries. Thus, in default of the means of making gold, he gave
us such useful chemicals as nitric acid, nitrate of silver, and oxide
of copper. Incidentally he wrote several hundred treatises on his two
"subjects," an English translation of one, the "Summæ Perfectionis,"
having been published in 1686 by Richard Russell, himself an alchemist
of respectable attainments.

Albertus Magnus, again, gave every excuse to the vulgar for regarding
him as infernally inspired. That is to say, he was a scholar of great
attainments in a day when scholars were chiefly remarkable for their
dense ignorance, and fully deserved some less ambiguous sobriquet than
that bestowed upon him by some writers of "Founder of the Schoolmen."
A Dominican, he held the chair of Theology at Padua in 1222 while
still a young man. Grown weary of a sedentary life, he resigned his
professorship and taught in many of the chief European cities, and more
particularly in Paris, where he lived for three years in company with
his illustrious pupil, Thomas Aquinas. He was at one time appointed
Bishop of Regensburg, but very soon resigned, finding his episcopal
duties interfere with his studies. Of the twenty-five folios from his
pen, one is devoted to alchemy, and he was a magician of the first
class--so, at least, succeeding generations averred, though he himself
very likely had no suspicions thereof. Among other of his possessions
was a brazen statue with the gift of speech, a gift exercised with such
assiduity as to exhaust the patience even of the saintly Thomas Aquinas
himself, so that he was constrained to shatter it to pieces.

Roger Bacon, inventor and owner of an even more famous brazen head,
was no less illustrious a scholar, and as fully deserved his admiring
nickname "The Admirable Doctor," even though he were not in actual
fact the inventor of gunpowder and the telescope, as asserted by his
admirers. A native of Somerset, and born, traditionally, the year
before the signing of Magna Charta, he might have ranked among the
greatest Englishmen had not his reputation as a magician given him
the suggestion of being a myth altogether. Something of a heretic
he was, although in orders, and his writings brought down upon him
the suspicions of the General of the Franciscan Order, to which he
belonged. Pope Clement IV. extended protection to him for a time, even
to the extent of studying his works, and more particularly his "Magnum
Opus," but later the Franciscan General condemned his writings, and he
spent fourteen years in prison, being released only two years before
his death. But his historical achievements were as nothing to his
legendary possession, in partnership with Friar Bungay, of the Talking
Head. Less garrulous than Albertus' statue, it emitted only three
sentences: "Time is. Time was. Time is past." Its last dictum, having
unfortunately for all audience a foolish servant, and being by him held
up to ridicule, it fell to the ground and was smashed to pieces, thus
depriving its inventor of his cherished scheme--by its help to surround
England with a brazen rampart no whit less efficacious against the
assaults of the King's enemies than are our present-day ironclads.

Friar Bacon was not undeserving of the posthumous popularity he
achieved in song and story, for he it was who made magic and
alchemy really popular pursuits in this country. So numerous were
his imitators that rather more than a century after his death--in
1434--the alchemical manufacture of gold and silver was declared a
felony. Twenty-one years later Henry VI., being, as he usually was,
in urgent need of ready money, saw reason to modify the Governmental
attitude, and granted a number of patents--to ecclesiastics as well as
laymen--for seeking after the Philosopher's Stone, with the declared
purpose of paying the Royal debts out of the proceeds. In which design
he was, it is to be feared, disappointed.

Dr. Dee, the friend and gossip of Queen Elizabeth, may be taken as
marking the point at which the alchemist ceases to be an inhabitant
of any half-way world and becomes altogether human. A Londoner by
birth, he was born in 1527, became a B.A. of Cambridge University
and Rector of Upton-upon-Severn. His ecclesiastical duties could not
contain his energies, and so well versed did he become in arts magical
that, upon a waxen effigy of Queen Elizabeth being found in Lincoln's
Inn Fields--and a waxen effigy had only one meaning in Elizabeth's
time--he was employed to counteract the evil spells contained in it,
which he did with such conspicuous success that the Royal Person
suffered no ill-effects whatever. Unfortunately for himself, Dr. Dee
acquired in course of time a disciple, one Edward Kelly. Kelly proved
an apt daunter of demons, but he was totally lacking in the innocent
credulity so noticeable in the character of his reverend mentor. At
his prompting Dr. Dee undertook a Continental tour, which resulted
in disaster of the most overwhelming and the total loss of Dr. Dee's
good name. It is true that he may be considered to have deserved his
fate, for so absolute was his belief in his disciple that when that
_chevalier d'industrie_ received a message from a demoniacal familiar
that it was essential for the success of their alchemical enterprises
that they should exchange wives--Mrs. Dee being as well-favoured as
Mrs. Kelly was the reverse--the doctor accepted the situation with
implicit faith, and agreed to all that the spirits desired.

Among other seekers after the Philosopher's Stone and the Elixir Vitæ
who may be briefly referred to were Alain de l'Isle, otherwise Alanus
de Insulis, notable in that he actually discovered the elixir, if
his contemporaries may be believed, and who so far lived up to his
reputation as to defer his death, which occurred in 1298, until his
110th year; Raymond Lully, who, visiting England in or about 1312,
was provided with a laboratory within the precincts of Westminster
Abbey, where many years later a supply of gold-dust was found; Nicholas
Flamel, who died in 1419, and who gained most of his occult knowledge
from a volume written in Latin by the Patriarch Abraham; and, to come
to later years, William Lilly, a famous English practitioner of the
seventeenth century, and an adept in the use of the divining rod, with
which he sought for hidden treasures in Westminster Abbey, possibly
those left behind him by Raymond Lully.

Perhaps no symptom of civilisation is more disquieting than the
increasing tendency to compress the half-way worlds--built up by our
forefathers with such lavish expenditure of imagination--into the
narrow limits of that in which we are doomed to spend our working
days--not too joyously. We have seen how the alchemist and the magician
from semi-divine beings, vested with power over gods and men, have by
degrees come to be confounded with the cheap-jack of a country fair.
So it has been with many another denizen of the Unseeable. Consider,
for example, the once formidable giant. Originally gods, or but
little inferior to them, so that Olympus must exercise all its might
to prevail against them; at one time a nation in themselves, located
somewhere in Cornwall, with kings of their own, Corcoran, Blunderbore,
and the rest, aloof from man except when, for their pastime or
appetite, they raided his preserves, vulnerable, indeed, though only to
a superhuman Jack; where are your giants now? Goliath, though defeated
by David, was yet not dishonoured, in that he was warring not against a
puny, sling-armed shepherd, but against the whole might of the Jewish
Jehovah. There were giants on the earth in those days, the Scriptures
tell us, and that in terms giving us to understand that a giant was to
be regarded with respect, if not with admiration. Polyphemus, again,
though outwitted by a mortal, was none the less a figure almost divine,
god-like in his passions and his agony. The whole ancient world teems
with anecdotes, all proving the respectability of the old-time giant.
And to-day? I saw a giant myself some few years back. He was in a
show--and he was known as Goliath. A poor, lean, knock-kneed wavering
creature, half-idiotic, too, with a sickly, apologetic smile, as though
seeking to disarm the inevitable criticism his very existence must
provoke. Yet he was not to blame, poor, anachronistic wretch. Rather it
was the spirit of the age, that preferred to see him, set up for every
fool to jeer at, at sixpence a time, in a showman's booth, rather than
to watch him afar off, his terror magnified by distance, walking across
a lonely heath in the twilight, bearing a princess or a captive knight
along with him as his natural prey. The same spirit that has made the
giant shrink to an absurdity can see only the charlatan beneath the
flowing robes of the astrologer; and has argued the witch even out of
existence.

So it is with the mermaid. They showed one at the same booth wherein
the degenerate giant was mewed. A poor, shrunken, grotesque creature
enough, yet even so it might have passed for a symbol, if no more, had
they been content to leave it to our imagination. Instead they must
explain, even while they pocketed our sixpences, that the whole thing
was a dreary sham, concocted out of the fore-quarters of a monkey and
the tail end of a codfish, the whole welded together by the ingenious
fingers of some Japanese trickmonger. Yet there are those who would
uphold such cruel candour, who would prefer to pay sixpence in order to
see an ape-codfish rather than to remain in blissful ignorance, rather
than imagine that every wave may have its lovely tenant, a sea-maiden
of more than earthly tenderness and beauty. Civilisation prates to
us of dugongs and of manatees, and other fish-beasts that, it says,
rising upon the crest of a wave, sufficiently resemble the human form
to be mistaken for it by credulous, susceptible mariners. But is not
our faith in that tender story of the little mermaid who, for love
of a man, sought the earth in human shape even though she knew that
every step must cause her agony, every foot-mark be outlined with her
blood--is not it better for us to believe that fairy-tale than to cram
our weary brains with all the cynical truths of all the dime-museums or
schools of science between London and San Francisco?

Even those who smile at Neptune and his daughters cannot refuse the
tribute of a shudder to the Man-Beast. For however it be with the
mermaid, the were-wolf is no figment of the imagination. Not the
fanciful alone are convinced that many human beings partake of the
nature of certain beasts. You may pass them by the hundred in every
city street--men and women showing in their faces their kinship with
the horse, the dog, cat, monkey, lion, sparrow. And not in their faces
alone--for their features do but reflect the minds within them--the
man with the sharp, rat-like face nine times out of ten has all the
selfish canning of the rat. We have no need to seek for further
explanation of the centaur myth--to argue that some horseless nation,
seeing horsemen for the first time, accepted the man and his mount
as one and indivisible; there are plenty of men who have as much of
the equine as of the human in their composition. So it is with the
wolf-man--the were-wolf. He exists, and to this day, despite all your
civilising influences. Not among savages alone--or chiefly. He roams
the streets of our great cities, seeking his prey. Perhaps he lives in
the next street to you--a prosperous, respected citizen, with a shop
in Cheapside, a wife and family, and the regard of all his neighbours.
The wolf in him has never been aroused--may never be. Only, let Fate
or chance so will it, and--well, who can tell us Jack the Ripper's
antecedents? And where in all the annals of lycanthropy can you find a
grimmer instance of the man-wolf than Jack the Ripper?

With the were-wolf we return to closer contact with witchcraft
proper. It is true that the were-wolf was not always bewitched.
Sometimes the tendency was inborn--the man or woman was transformed
into the wolf at each recurrent full moon. In France--and more
particularly in the South, where lycanthropy has always had one of
its strongholds--the liability of certain individuals, especially
if they be born illegitimate, to this inconvenience is still firmly
credited by the popular mind. The were-wolf may be recognised for
that matter, even when in his human form, usually by the shape of his
broad, short-fingered hands and his hairy palm. It is even possible to
effect a permanent cure should the opportunity occur, and that by the
simple means of stabbing him three times in the forehead with a knife
while in his lupine shape. Again, in Scandinavia and elsewhere certain
men could transform themselves into wolves at will--a superstition
arising naturally enough out of traditions of the Berserkers and the
fits of wolfish madness into which they threw themselves. Yet again, as
Herodotus tells us, lycanthropy was sometimes a national observance.
The Neuri, if the Scythians were to be believed, were in the habit of
changing themselves into wolves once a year and remaining in that
shape for several days. But more frequently the change was attributable
to some evil spell cast by a witch. It is true that the wolf was only
one of many animals into whose shape she might condemn a human soul to
enter. Circe is, of course, a classical example; Saint Augustine, in
his "De Civitate Dei," relates how an old lady of his acquaintance used
to turn men into asses by means of enchantments--an example which has
been followed by younger ladies ever since, by the way--while Apuleius'
"Golden Ass" gives us an autobiographical testimony to the efficacy of
certain drugs towards the same end.

Doubtless because the wolf was extirpated in this country at a
comparatively early date English were-wolf legends are few and far
between. They could indeed only become universally current in a
country mainly pastoral and infested by wolves, as, for instance, in
ancient Arcadia, where indeed the were-wolf came into his highest
estate, or in many parts of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe to-day.
In certain Balkan districts the were-wolf shares the attributes of the
vampire, another allied superstition which is by no means without its
foundations of fact. Most people must have, indeed, been acquainted at
some time or other with the modern form of vampire, individuals who
unconsciously feed upon the vitality of those with whom they come into
contact. Many stories have been written, many legends founded upon
this phenomenon, to the truth of which many people have testified from
their own experience. At which point I leave the subject to those with
more scientific knowledge than myself.

In case there should be any who desire to transform themselves into a
wolf without the trouble and expense of resorting to a witch, I will
close this chapter with a spell warranted to produce the desired effect
without any further outlay than the price of a small copper knife. It
is of Russian origin, and is quoted from Sacharow by Mr. Baring Gould.
"He who desires to become an oborot (oborot = 'one transformed' =
were-wolf) let him seek in the forest a hewn-down tree; let him stab
it with a small copper knife and walk round the tree, repeating the
following incantation:

 On the sea, on the ocean, on the island, on Bujan,
 On the empty pasture gleams the moon, on an ash-stock lying
 In a greenwood, in a gloomy vale.
 Towards the stock wandereth a shaggy wolf,
 Horned cattle seeking for his sharp white fangs;
 But the wolf enters not the forest,
 But the wolf dives not into the shadowy vale.
 Moon, moon, gold-horned moon
 Check the flight of bullets, blunt the hunters' knives,
 Break the shepherds' cudgels,
 Cast wild fear upon all cattle,
 On men, on all creeping things,
 That they may not catch the grey wolf,
 That they may not rend his warm skin!
 My word is binding, more binding than sleep,
 More binding than the promise of a hero!

"Then he springs thrice over the tree and runs into the forest,
transformed into a wolf."




CHAPTER V

THE WITCH'S ATTRIBUTES


In his very learned and exhaustive treatise, "De la Démonomanie des
Sorciers," the worthy Bodin, with enterprise worthy of a modern
serial-story writer, keeps his reader's curiosity whetted to its
fullest by darkly hinting his knowledge of awesome spells and charms
commonly employed by Satan's servants. Unlike the modern writer,
however, he refrains from detailing them at length in his last chapter,
fearing to impart knowledge which may easily be put to the worst
account. However valuable a testimony to his good faith and discretion,
this would certainly have brought down upon him the strictures of
modern critics, and might indeed have entailed serious loss to the
world had not other less conscientious writers more than rectified the
omission.

It were, of course, impossible to include within the limits of such
a volume as is this--or of a hundred like it--one tithe of the great
store of spells, charms, and miscellaneous means towards enchantment
gathered together in the long centuries since the birth of the first
witch. So also it is impossible to select any particular stage in her
long evolution as the most characteristic, as regards her manners
and customs, of all that we imply by the word "witch." On the other
hand, she has definitely crystallised in the minds of those of us who
have ever been children, in the shape of the "horrid old witch" of
fairy lore; and just as, in a preceding chapter, I have endeavoured
to reproduce one of her working days--as imaged in the popular
mind--so the witch of the Middle Ages may best be chosen when we would
reconstruct her more human aspect.

Of her actual appearance, divested of her infernal attributes, no
better description could be desired than that given by Reginald
Scot in "The Discoverie of Witchcraft":--"Witches be commonly old,
lame, bleare-eied, pale, fowle, and full of wrinkles; poore, sullen,
superstitious, and papists"--(it is perhaps unnecessary to point out
that Scot was of the Reformed Faith)--"or such as know no religion;
in whose drousie minds the devill hath goten a fine seat; so as, what
mischiefe, mischance, calamitie or slaughter is brought to passe, they
are easilie persuaded the same is doone by themselves, imprinting in
their minds an earnest and constant imagination hereof. They are leane
and deformed, showing melancholie in their faces to the horror of all
that see them. They are doting, scolds, mad, devilish."

Endowed with so unfortunate a personality, it is not surprising that,
as Scot goes on to inform us, the witch should have found it difficult
to make a living. It is indeed an interesting example of the law of
supply and demand that such woeful figures being needed for the proper
propagation of the witch-mania, the conditions of mediæval life, by
their harsh pressure upon the poor and needy among women, should
have provided them by the score in every village. You may find the
conventional witch-figure to-day in the lonely hamlet or in the city
workhouse, but, thanks to our better conditions of life, she has become
almost as rare as have accusations of witchcraft against her.

The only means of subsistence open to her, Scot goes on, is to beg from
house to house. In time it comes about that people grow weary of her
importunities. Perhaps they show their impatience too openly. "Then,"
says Scot, "she curses one or the other, from the master of the house
to the little pig that lieth in the stie." Someone in the wide range
between those two extremes will be certain to suffer some kind of
mischance before long--on much the same principle as that which gives
life to one of our most popular present-day superstitions, the ill-luck
attending a gathering of "thirteen at table." Any such disaster is
naturally attributed to the old beggar-woman--who is thus at once
elevated to the dangerous eminence of witch-hood. Nor did the sufferer
always wait for her curse. Edward Fairfax, for example, the learned
seventeenth century translator of Tasso, upon an epidemic sickness
attacking his children, sought out their symptoms in a "book of
medicine." Not finding any mention of "such agonies" as those exhibited
by his children, he determined that some unholy agency must be at
work. His thoughts turned, naturally enough, to the gloomy forest of
Knaresborough, within convenient distance of his abode. Nothing could
be more suspicious than the mere fact of living in such a suggestive
locality, yet Margaret White, widow of a man executed for theft, her
daughter, and Jennie Dibble, an old widow coming of a family suspected
of witchcraft for generations past, were imprudent, or unfortunate,
enough to live within its borders. The natural result attended their
rashness--and so earnest was the worthy Fairfax that he set the whole
proceedings down in a book, adding a minute account of the symptoms and
delusions of the invalids.

As the King has his orb and sceptre, the astrologer his spheres and
quadrant, so the witch has her insignia of office. And it is a strong
indication of her descent from the first house-wife that most of them
are domestic or familiar objects. The imp or "familiar" who attends
her may have the form of a bird or dog, but is far more often the
most domestic animal of all, the cat. Frequently it is malformed or
monstrous, in common with Satan himself and all the beings who owe him
allegiance. It may have any number of legs, several tails, or none at
all; its mewing is diabolic; it may be far above the usual stature
of its kind. Usually it is black, but is equally eligible if white
or yellow. As is a common incident of all religions, the symbol is
sometimes confused with the office, the witch and her cat exchanging
identities. Thus witches have confessed under torture to have formerly
been cats, and to owe their human shape to Satan's interference with
natural laws. A piebald cat is said to become a witch if it live for
nine years, and the witch, when upon a nefarious errand, frequently
assumes a feline shape.

A characteristic of the witch, in common with demons and imps in
general, is that she does everything contrary to the tastes and customs
of good Christians. With the one steady exception of the cat, she
most esteems animals repellent to the ordinary person, to women in
particular, and her imps may appear as rats or mice, usually tailless,
spiders, fleas, nits, flies, toads, hares, crows, hornets, moles,
frogs, or, curiously enough, domestic poultry. An important item in
her outfit is her broomstick--as homely an insignia as the cat. Its
feminine connection is obvious, though possibly its power of flight may
be derived from the magic wand. Smeared with a Satanic ointment, it
acts as her chariot, or is prepared to serve her as a weapon of offence
or defence--and woe to him who suffers a beating from the witch's
broom-handle.

The spindle, emblem of domesticity, becomes in the witch's hands a
maleficial instrument, and may be applied by her to a number of evil
uses. The idea of the thread of life enters into many mythologies, and
it, from some confusion of ideas, may well have been instrumental in
transforming the natural occupation of an old woman into one of the
dangerous tricks of witchcraft.

Just as "loathly" reptiles, the snake, the lizard, and the toad, stand
in close relation to the witch, so plants growing in suggestive places
or notoriously poison-bearing are especially connected with her.
Hemlock, mandrake, henbane, deadly nightshade--or moonshade, as it was
sometimes called--saffron, poplar-leaves, all avoided by the common
folk, are held in high esteem by Satan's servants for their use in the
concoction of love-philtres and other noxious brews.

For the brewing of potions a cauldron is a matter of course, and the
mixtures popularly supposed to have been brewed in it were enough to
have given it an evil reputation for all time. The enumeration of
their ingredients is unpleasantly suggestive, even to the unbeliever,
and the credulous may well have shuddered at such a mixture as:

 Eye of newt and toe of frog,
 Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
 Adder's fork and blindworm's sting,
 Lizard's leg and howlet's wing,

 Liver of blaspheming Jew,
 Gall of goat and slips of yew,

 Finger of birth-strangled babe, &c., &c.

It is true that a Macbeth was not to be catered for every day, and
simpler effects could have been obtained by less complicated, though
perhaps not less unappetising means.

Of all these insignia and attributes of her office the most important,
as the most characteristic, were her "familiars" or imps. In mediæval
real life, just as in modern fairy-lore, the witch's possession of
a cat--or other animal, however harmless it might seem--was proof
positive of her guilt. Without her familiar, indeed, she could scarcely
have claimed the powers attributed to her, for, whatever its form,
it was the ever-present reminder of her contract with their common
master, and in many cases the channel through which his commands
and the means for their carrying out were communicated to her. The
infinite variations of form and kind of these same "imps," as set
out in the proceedings at the trials, bear strong testimony of the
wild imaginations possessed by our forefathers or the Devil, as we
may prefer to believe. Thus Margaret White, in the Fairfax case just
referred to, had for familiar a deformed creature with many feet,
sooty in hue and rough-haired, being of name unknown. Her daughter,
who resembled her in all things, with the addition of "impudency and
lewd behaviour," had a white cat spotted with black. Jennie Dibble had
a black cat called Gibbe, "who hath attended her above 40 yeares." All
these imps, whatever their shape, obtained their nourishment by sucking
their mistress's blood, leaving marks upon her body, which formed
deadly evidence against her at her trial. Nor was there any hope of
cheating justice by giving these devil's marks commonplace forms, for
they were recognised even when made, by the Devil's cunning, to appear
like moles, birth-marks, or even flea-bites!

There is some slight confusion about the provenance of this same
witch-mark, unless it varied in individual cases--whether, that is
to say, the marks were the result of suckling the imps, or whether,
being already imprinted on the witch's body, they were selected for
that reason. Certainly there is frequent reference to the ceremony
of its imprinting immediately after the signature of the contract
with Satan, and at the same time that her nickname and familiars were
assigned to his new servant. Its object is ingeniously explained by
the unctuous Pierre de Lancre, no mean authority. Satan, he tells us,
wishing to ape God in all things, has instituted this marking of his
servants in imitation of the stigmata and also of the circumcision. A
more practical explanation, given by some writers, is that the Devil's
mark, having the quality of itching at certain seasons, is conferred
upon witches that they may never oversleep themselves and thus be late
for the Sabbath ceremonies. The root of the whole matter, however, as
the worthy Pierre is half-inclined to believe--and as some of us may
be half-inclined to agree with him in thinking--is that the mark (he
compares it to a toad's foot) has merely been instituted by Satan out
of his love of importance and display, and with no further motive.

Although in earlier ages this formality may have been dispensed with,
by the sixteenth century the witch invariably signed a definite
contract with Satan. As was only too probable, seeing that they
dispensed with an attorney, while the other person to the bargain,
himself of no mean intelligence, might chose among an infinity of legal
advisers, the contract was of a very one-sided nature. Nothing, at
least, was ever outwardly visible of those advantages for which she
bartered away body and soul. Even such satisfaction as may have come
from attending the Sabbaths was dearly bought, for not only did her
earthly neighbours show their resentment in the most forcible manner,
but her reception by Satan, unless she had carried out his instructions
to the furthest limit, was apt to be unamiable in the extreme. Of any
more material satisfaction--save, of course, that, and it is perhaps as
substantial as human happiness can be--of paying off old scores, there
is no sign at all. It is perhaps this lack of business instinct which
most markedly differentiates the witch from the sorcerer. He almost
invariably gained whatever worldly advantages he desired during the
term of his agreement, and not infrequently tricked Satan out of his
share of the bargain at the end of it.

Of the preliminaries leading up to the bargain we are given an
illuminating glimpse by Edward Fairfax in his already quoted book. His
daughter Helen, being in a trance, saw the wife of one Thorp, and, with
the impertinent enthusiasm of youth--as it now seems to us--urged her
to pray "with such vehemence that Thorp's wife wept bitterly a long
time. Then she asked her how she became a witch, and the woman answered
that a man like to a man of this world came unto her upon the moor
and offered her money, which at first she refused, but at the second
time of his coming he did overcome her in such sort that she gave him
her body and soul, and he made her a lease back again of her life for
40 years, which was now ended upon Shrove Tuesday last. The man did
write their lease with their blood, and they likewise with their blood
set their hands to them. That her lease was in his keeping, and every
7th year he showed it unto them, and now it was 3 years since she saw
hers, and that each 7th year they renewed it. She said further that
she knew 40 witches, but there were only 7 of her company." From other
accounts we learn that in the act of signing the contract the witch
frequently put one hand to the sole of her foot and the other to the
crown of her head--a gymnastic exercise that can scarcely have been
coincident with the affixing of her signature, however. Anyone who,
despite his cozening of witches, may urge the number of times when
Satan was over-reached by sorcerers, as a proof that his intelligence
is over-rated, may find evidence that he is occasionally gifted with
business acumen in the confession of one M. Guillaume de Livre, Doctor
of Theology, who was so unlucky as to be condemned for witchcraft in
1453. By the terms of his bargain with Satan he was bound to preach
whenever possible that there was no such thing as real sorcery. "Such,"
as Bodin very acutely remarks, "are the wiles and lures of the Evil
One."

Her contract once signed, the witch naturally became as soon as
possible proficient in the "Devil's rudiments," which James I.
describes as "unlawful charms without natural causes. Such kinde of
charms as commonlie dafte wives use, for healing of forspoken goodes,
for preserving them from evil eyes, by knitting roun trees or sundriest
kinde of hearbes, to the haire or tailes of the goodes; by curing the
worme, by stemming of bloode; by healing of Horse-crookes, by turning
of the riddle, or doing of such-like innumerable things by words
without applying aniething meete to the part offended, as Mediciners
doe." "Children cannot smile upon a witch without the hazard of a
perpetual wry smile," writes Stephens in 1615. "Her prayers and amens
be a charm and a curse ... her highest adoration hie yew trees, dampest
churchyards, and a fayre moonlight; her best preservatives odde numbers
and mightie Tetragrammaton."

Her crimes were many and varied enough to provide contemporary writers
with long pages of delectable matter. Thus, Holland declares, in "A
Treatise Against Witchcraft" (1590), that:--

 They renounce God and all true religion.

 They blaspheme and provoke His Divine Majesty with unspeakable
 contempt.

 They believe in the Devill, adore him, and sacrifice unto him.

 They offer their children unto devills.

 They sweare unto Satan, and promise to bring as many as they can unto
 his service and profession.

 They invocate Satan in their praiers, and sweare by his name.

Besides preaching gross immorality:--

 They commit horrible murders, and kill young infants.

 All Sorcerers for the most part exercise poison, and to kill with
 poison is far more heinous than simple murder.

 They kill men's cattle.

 And, lastly, the witches (as they themselves confesse) commit many
 abominations and filthenes.

Other accounts follow similar lines or add further indictments; as
Jean Bodin, who also details the crimes of eating human flesh and
drinking blood, destroying fruit and causing famine and sterility.
Generally speaking, then, the crimes of witchcraft fall under the
headings of offences against religion and the Church; of those against
the community in general, such as causing epidemics or bad weather;
and of those against individuals, including murder, especially of
young children, causing disease, and injury to property. Such catholic
appreciation in wrong-doing could not fail to arouse the disapproval
of all right-thinking people, and as the mere charge of witchcraft,
supported by any one accusation, implied the perpetration of all
these various misdeeds, it is scarcely wonderful that the witch, once
apprehended, had small chance of escape.

Although less generally harmful in its effects, the witch's passion
for aviation was as reprehensible as the rest of her proceedings. For
one thing, it was generally considered an offensive parody of the
angels' mode of progression. Pierre de Lancre, indeed, who is unusually
well informed, states this as a fact. He points out further that the
good angels can fly much faster, being able to use their wings, while
the witch has to make use of some artificial means of support, as,
for example, a broomstick. It is characteristic of the cross-grained
eccentricity of witches that whereas a good angel, like a good
Christian, enters or leaves the room by the door, the witch prefers the
less convenient egress of the chimney. This was the more aggravating
that it rendered useless any attempts by beleaguering the house to
catch her in the act, seeing that she only flies by night; and Satan
further provides against discovery by allowing her to leave her imp in
her own shape behind her, and thus, if need be, provide a satisfactory
alibi. The only way of getting at the real fact of the matter was then
by obtaining a confession from the witch herself--which could, however,
usually be arranged for by the authorities. The broomstick, be it
noted, was not an essential to the witch's aerial journeys; asses and
horses, if properly anointed with witch-ointment, could be used at a
pinch, as could a straw, an eggshell, or a barndoor fowl--to mention
three out of many possible mounts. Satan has been known to take upon
himself the shape of a goat, and thus to provide a steed for those
he most delights to honour. This is, however, attended by one grave
and dangerous disadvantage. Satan hates the sound of church-bells,
and should he hear the sound of the Ave Maria while carrying a witch
through the air, will very likely drop her at once--as actually
happened to a witch named Lucrece in 1524.

The ever-helpful De Lancre details four ways of getting to the Sabbath:

(1) By thought or meditation, as in the vision of Ezekiel.

(2) On foot.

(3) By being carried through the air by Satan.

(4) By going in dreams or illusions, which leave the witch uncertain
whether she has really been present in the flesh or only had a
nightmare. But De Lancre is assured that the transport is real, seeing
that they have actually been seen descending from the clouds, naked and
often wounded, while they are often so exhausted thereafter as to be
obliged to keep their beds for several days.

The ointment used by witches for such purposes are by many considered
to have been but another instance of Satan's cunning and lack of good
faith. As a tangible token of her service, they flatter the witch's
sense of importance--though in themselves quite useless--while the
obtaining of these ingredients necessitates a good deal of mischief
being done to good Christians. Holland, who tells us that "Witches
make oyntements of the fatte of young children," adds that Satan has
no great opinion of the said "oyntements," but loves the bloodshed
it entails. Wierus provides us with a more detailed gruesome recipe.
By their spells witches cause young children to die in the cradle or
by their mother's side. When they are dead, of suffocation or other
causes, and have been buried, the witches take them out of the grave
and boil them in a cauldron until the flesh leaves the bones, and
the rest is as easy to drink as melted wax. Of the thicker portions
the ointment is made; while whoever drinks the liquid will become
mistress of the whole art of witchcraft. Bacon speaks of several other
ingredients. To the customary fat of children "digged out of their
graves," he adds the juices of smallage, wolf-bane, and cinque-foil,
mingled with the meal of fine wheat, and, he says, "I suppose the
soporiferous medicines are likest to do it, which are henbane, hemlock,
mandrake, moonshade, tobacco, opium, saffron, and poplar-leaves." Some
are of opinion that such soporific elements are introduced into the
ointment by the Devil in order to dull the senses of his servants, that
he may the more easily do as he likes with them--but as those who have
gone so far in procuring the _pièce de résistance_ of the mixture
are not likely to be over-scrupulous, such a precaution seems almost
unnecessary.

The poisons, "charms," and baleful powders needed by the witches
in their ordinary business-routine may be made either in their own
domestic cauldron or at the Sabbath. They include such ingredients
as the heads of toads, spiders, or the bark and pith of the "Arbre
Maudit." The semi-solids are the most poisonous to human beings,
while the liquid varieties are used to destroy crops and orchards.
For doing damage on the sea or among the mountains, powders are well
considered--made of toads' flesh, roasted, dried, and pulverised, and
subsequently cast into the air or scattered on the ground, according
to the circumstances of the case. Another and very baleful poison may
be made of "green water"; so potent is it that even to touch it causes
instant death. A paste entirely efficacious against confession under
torture may be made with black millet mixed with the dried liver of an
unbaptised child. A skinned cat, a toad, a lizard or an asp, roasted,
dried, pulverised, and burned until required, may be put to excellent
purposes of offence. Cast in the air or on the ground, with the words
"This is for corn, this for apples," and so forth, such a powder, if
used in sufficient quantities, will turn a smiling countryside into a
desert. There is, indeed, one plant which resists all such spells--the
common onion. Thus De Lancre tells us of a certain garden so injured
by these powders that everything died except the onions--for which,
he adds, the Devil has a particular respect. If this respect comes
from dislike of its smell--and Satan is known to have a very delicate
nose--our modern prejudice against the onion-eater immediately after
dinner would seem to be only another proof of man's natural tendency to
evil.

In deference to the unceasing demand, the witch has ever been a
prominent exponent of prophecy and divination--nor have any of her
practices given more offence to Holy Church. At the late period of
her history we are now considering, she had acquired a sufficiently
varied repertoire of methods to satisfy the most exacting. To quote
from a long list supplied us by Holland, the witch of his times could
divine:--"By fire, by the ayer, by water, by the earth, by the dead,
by a sive, by a cocke, by a twibble or an axe, by a ring, by Ise, by
meale, by a stone, by a lawrell, by an asse's head, by smoake, by a
rodde, by pieces of wood, by a basin of water, by certain round vessels
of glasse full of water, by rubbing of the nayles." All of which go
to show that she had lost little of the skill possessed before her by
Egyptian necromancers and mediæval magicians.

But the most fantastic, as it became the most famous, incident of
the witch's life, as viewed by her contemporaries, was certainly
the Sabbath. In a previous chapter I have endeavoured to provide
some narrative account of such a gathering as being the simplest
and directest method of reconstruction. It was, however, obviously
impossible to include one tithe of the various incidents at one or
other period attached thereto by writers, Inquisitors or witches
themselves--and this quite apart from the obvious limitations entailed,
in matters of detail, upon one who writes for the general public.

These same Sabbaths might be described in modern terms of commerce as
Satan's stock-takings, whereon he might check the number and loyalty
of his subjects. They were of two kinds--the more important, or
"Sabbaths-General," to which flocked witches from all parts of the
world, and the more localised and frequent "Sabbaths" simple. Their
place and time varied, though most frequently held after midnight
on Friday--an arrangement agreeable to the Church view of the Jews
and their Sabbath, and not impossibly arising therefrom. In earlier
days--or so De Lancre informs us--the Devil chose Monday, the first
day of the week, as most suitable, but, with his usual inconstancy,
has varied it several times since then. Darkness was not essential,
Sabbaths having been occasionally held at high noon. In Southern
countries, indeed, the hours between midday and 3 p.m. were considered
the most dangerous to mortals, the terrestrial demons having then most
power. The pleasures of the midday meal might have a fatal influence in
putting the intended victim off his guard, his sleepy content making
him peculiarly susceptible to the attacks of Satan's agents. Some
authorities give from 11 p.m. to 2 a.m. as the hours, seeing that, as
in more legitimate assemblies, everybody could not arrive at once,
and there was much business to be gone through. The Sabbaths-General,
in mockery of the Church, were usually held on the four great annual
festivals. They might take place anywhere, though certain spots were
especially favoured. Market-places, especially if beside an important
church, were among them. The mountain of Dôme, in Perigord, again, was
among the most famous meeting-places in France, as were the Wrekin
in England, the Blocksburg in Germany, and the Blockula in Sweden.
Attendance was not a mere matter of pleasure, witches who failed being
severely punished by demons sent in search of them or on their next
appearance.

Satan himself usually presided in person, though he was occasionally
represented by an underling, to the great anger of the witches. Thus,
on one occasion, he deprecated their wrath by the explanation that in
view of a strenuous persecution then on foot he had been pleading the
cause of his followers with Janicot--an impious name for Jesus--that
he had won his case, and that they would not be burnt. As a reward, he
added, they must bring him eighty children, to be given to a certain
priest present at the Sabbath, and later tried for sorcery. He appeared
in many forms, that of a goat being perhaps his favourite. Anyone who
has ever studied a goat's face, and more particularly the expression
of its eyes, can testify to Satan's sense of the fitness of things
in so doing, as also to that of the old Flemish painters, and more
particularly Jerome Bosch, who, in the paintings of devils for which
he is so justly famous, has made copious use of the goat's head as
a model for his most demoniacal demons. As a goat Satan was usually
of monstrous size, having one face in the usual position and another
between his haunches. Marie d'Aguerre, who attended a Sabbath at the
mature age of thirteen, and afterwards paid the penalty with her life,
testified that in the middle of the assembly was a huge pitcher of
water, out of which Satan emerged as a goat, grew to enormous size,
and, on his departure, returned again into the pitcher. Sometimes he
had two pairs of horns, in front and behind, more usually only three in
all, that in the centre supporting a light, to serve the double purpose
of illuminating the proceedings and of lighting the candles carried
by the witches in mockery of Christian ceremonies. Above his horns he
sometimes wore a species of cap, and sometimes he had a long tail, in
the usual place, with a human face above it. This was saluted by his
guests, but he was unable to speak with it.

He might also appear in the form of a tree-trunk, without arms or feet,
but with the indistinct suggestion of a face, seated on a throne;
sometimes like a giant, clad in dark clothes, as he does not wish
his disciples to realise that he is himself suffering the proverbial
torture of hell. Some attendants at the Sabbath--as, for instance, poor
little Corneille Brolic, aged twelve--saw him as a four-horned man;
others, Janette d'Abadie among them, vouch for his having two faces;
others saw him as a black greyhound or a huge brass bull lying on the
ground. The constant uncertainty as to the form likely to be taken
by the host must have been an added interest to the proceedings--and
it has been supposed by some that his powerful imagination led him
occasionally to appear in a different shape to each several guest,
and to change from one to another at frequent intervals during the
proceedings.

The actual ceremonies, festivities, and ritual of the Sabbath varied
greatly at different times and places, but having already given a
typical example in an earlier chapter, it is unnecessary to dwell
further on so unsavoury a subject. The various accounts, evolved from
the imaginations of over-willing witnesses or tortured witch, however
much they may suffer in detail, unite in being the expression of the
foulest and most obscene images of a disordered brain, and as such
we may leave them. So again the Devil's Mass was conducted in such a
manner as might most impiously parody the Christian ritual. The Devil,
however, as an old writer astutely points out, in thinking to imitate
Christ by sitting on a great golden throne during the ceremony, only
shows his exceeding folly, forgetting that, although Christ often
spoke while sitting, He yet gained His greatest triumph on the Cross.
With the aforesaid throne Satan conjures up all the paraphernalia
of worship--temples, altars, music, bells--though only little ones,
for he hates and fears church-bells--and even crosses. Four priests,
one serving the Mass, a deacon, and a sub-deacon usually officiate.
Candles, holy water, incense, the offertory, sermons, and the elevation
of the Host all find place in the Devil's Mass. The sign of the cross
is made with the left hand, and in further mockery they chant:--

 In nomine Patricia Aragueaco
 Petrica, agora, agora! Valentia
 Jouanda goure gaitz goustia.

Which is to say:--

 Au nom de Patrique, Petrique d'Arragon, à cette heure. Valence, tout
 nostre mal est passé.

Three languages, according to French authorities, Latin, Spanish and
Basque, are employed in mockery of the Trinity. The priest usually
elevates the Host--which is black and triangular--standing upon his
head. At the elevation of the cup--often black--the whole assembly
cry "Black crow!" but not even Satan dare say this at the elevation
of the Host. The ceremony of baptism is performed upon toads; while
even martyrs are not forgotten--this part being played by sorcerers so
bemused that torture has become a mockery to them.

One Jehannes du Hard, in her confession, gives us an account of the
method of compounding poisons and witch-ointments at the Sabbaths.
On her second attendance she saw a great man dressed in black. At
attendant produced an earthenware pot, in which were many great spiders
and a white slug, along with two toads. These latter Jehannes skinned,
while a companion pounded the spiders and the slug with a pestle. To
this mixture the skinned toads were added later, having first been
beaten with switches to render them more poisonous. The resultant
mixture was used with entire success to poison cattle. There is some
uncertainty whether this, and similar poisons, was identical with the
ointment used by witches to anoint their broomsticks. In any case, it
is intended by Satan in mockery of the sacrament of baptism and Holy
Unction.

Were there any room for doubting that Satan habitually breaks faith
with his servants, it would be dispelled by the testimony given before
the oft-quoted authority, Pierre de Lancre, when that learned gentleman
was holding an inquisition in the hag-ridden district of Labourt by
command of the Parliament of Bordeaux. That of one witness, Legier
Riuasseau, was the more dependable in that, although an eye-witness at
the Sabbath, he was yet under no sort of obligation to Satan, having
bought the privilege from him for the moderate price of two fingers and
two and a half toes. His object was worthier than the mere gratifying
of curiosity, for he wished to disenchant a certain Jeanne Perrin, who
was among those present. That he might be present without danger, two
friends shut him in a dark room, wherein he remained for eight days.
There the Devil appeared to him, and explained that if he wished to
see the Sabbath and also acquire the power of healing he could do it
for two toes and half a foot, to which bargain he agreed. His friends
afterwards released him from his voluntary captivity, but he could
not escape the dark man, who eight days later took the flesh from the
great and second toes and half the third of his left foot, without,
however, hurting him in the least. Had he desired the power of doing
evil as well, he might have bought it for the remainder of his toes
and half the foot, but being as good as he was prudent he refrained.
From his further evidence we learn that the Sabbath takes place in the
market-square towards midnight on Wednesday or Friday--Satan preferring
stormy weather, that the wind may scatter poisons over a wider area.
That witnessed by Riuasseau was presided over by a large and a small
devil, and all present--the witness presumably excepted--adored Satan
by kissing his posterior face. Thereafter sixty witches danced before
him, each with a cat tied to the tail of her shift. Marie de la Ralde,
another witness, deposed that she often saw Satan approach the children
present with a hot iron, but could not say definitely whether or not he
branded them. She asserted that all enjoyed the Sabbath to the utmost,
the Devil having absolute command over their hearts and wills. Witches,
she added, hear heavenly music and really believe themselves to be in
Paradise. The Devil persuades them that there is no such place as Hell,
and further, by rendering them momentarily immune, that fire has no
power over them. As a further proof of Satanic astuteness, she declared
that witches see so many priests, pastors, confessors, and other
persons of quality attending the Sabbath as to be perfectly convinced
of the entire correctness of the proceedings. She herself, even when
she saw that the Host was black instead of white, did not at the time
realise that anything was wrong.




CHAPTER VI

SOME REPRESENTATIVE ENGLISH WITCHES


Having seen how the witch in general lived and went about her evil
business, it may be well to consider the personality of individual
members of the craft. There have been, needless to say, many women
famous in other directions, who have been incidentally regarded by
their contemporaries as possessing superhuman powers. Indeed, to be
condemned as a witch was but to have an official seal set upon the
highest compliment payable to a woman in more than one period of the
earth's history, seeing that it marked her out from the dead level
of mediocrity to which her sex was legally and socially condemned.
It is as unnecessary as it is unfair to believe that the English and
French worthies who burnt Joan of Arc were hypocrites. That a woman
could do as she had done was to them capable only of two explanations.
Either she must be inspired from above or from below, according to
the point of view. As it was too much to expect that those whom she
had defeated should regard her victories as divine, it followed that
they could seem nothing but infernal. From Cleopatra or the Witch of
Endor onwards, the exceptional woman has had the choice of effacing her
individuality or of being regarded as an agent of the devil. It is true
that in our own more squeamish days, we prefer to regard her as either
eccentric or improper, according to her social position and other
attendant circumstances.

We may then disregard such historical characters as have other claims
to fame, and confine our attention to those whose activities were
concentrated upon witchcraft pure and simple. Nor have we to go far
afield for noteworthy examples, seeing that they abound, not only
in England, but even in London itself. Perhaps the most generally
respected of English witches, alike by her contemporaries and
succeeding generations is Mother Shipton, who flourished in the reign
of Henry VII. More fortunate than the majority of her colleagues,
she died a natural death, and it is scarcely too much to say that
her memory is green even to-day--among certain classes of society,
at any rate. In common with the Marquess of Granby, Lord Nelson, and
other popular idols, Mother Shipton has acted as sponsor for more than
one public house in different English counties; the most familiar to
Londoners being perhaps that at the corner of Malden Road, Camden Town,
a stopping-place on the tram and omnibus route to Hampstead Heath. I
have not been able to trace any definite connection between the witch
and the hostelry--probably the choice of a sign was made in order to
rival another inn named after Mother Redcap--herself a witch of some
eminence--in the same district. Mother Shipton was a native of the
gloomy forest of Knaresborough, in Yorkshire, a famous forcing-ground
of Black Magic, and, although few details of her life have been
preserved, we know, so far as tradition may be trusted, that despite
her evil reputation and the certainty that she had sold herself to the
devil, she was granted Christian burial in the churchyard at Clifton,
in Yorkshire, where she died. Whether this implies that she repented,
and cheated the devil of his bargain, before her death, or only that
the local authorities were lax in their supervision of the parish
cemetery, is an open question. At least, a tombstone is said to have
been there erected to her memory with the following inscription:--

 Here lies she who never lied,
 Whose skill often has been tried.
 Her prophecies shall still survive
 And ever keep her name alive.

No doubt Mother Shipton was as gifted as her fellows in the customary
arts of witchcraft, but tradition draws a merciful veil over her
exploits as poisoner or spell-caster. Her fame rests upon her
prophecies, and whether she actually uttered them herself or they
were attributed to her after the event, by admiring biographers, they
have ever since been accepted as worthy of all respect even when not
attended by the result she anticipated. Thus, although she is said to
have foretold the coming of the Stuarts in the person of James I. with
the uncomplimentary comment that with him:--

 From the cold North
 Every evil shall come forth.

the British Solon yet placed the greatest reliance upon her
prognostications, as did Elizabeth before him. It is even said that his
attempts by various pronunciamentos to stay the increase in the size of
London were prompted by Mother Shipton's well-known prophecy that:--

 When Highgate Hill stands in the midst of London,
 Then shall the folk of England be undone.

If it be argued by the sceptical that, although the London boundaries
are now considerably beyond Highgate Hill, the country has so far
prospered, it is to be remembered that the prophetess gave no date
for the undoing of the English people, and that, if we may believe
the mournful views taken of our national future by the leaders of
whichever political party happens to be out of office, Mother Shipton's
reliability is in a fair way of being vindicated within a very few
years.

Yet another of her predictions--perhaps the most famous, indeed--may
have been verified already in the days of Marlborough, Nelson, or
any of several eminent commanders, or may be still in process of
fulfilment. It runs as follows:

 The time shall come when seas of blood
 Shall mingle with a greater flood;
 Great noise shall then be heard;
 Great shouts and cries
 And seas shall thunder louder than the skies;
 Then shall three lions fight with three, and bring
 Joy to a people, honour to a king.
 That fiery year as soon as o'er
 Peace shall then be as before;
 Plenty shall everywhere be found,
 And men with swords shall plough the ground.

The vagueness of this and other prophecies by Mother Shipton, however
much they may exasperate the stickler for exactitude, bear witness to
her direct descent from the ancient sibyls and pythons, few, if any, of
whom ever vouchsafed anything more definite.

Passing by Young Nixon, the dwarf, who, although a prophet scarcely
less inferior in fame to Mother Shipton, scarcely falls within the
limit of this volume--though it may be noted that one of his best-known
prophecies, that he would starve to death, did actually come true--we
may next consider the life-history of a witch less legendary than
Mother Shipton--the Mother Redcap referred to above as having provided
a sign for a Camden Town public house. Her career is detailed with
such care in Palmer's "St. Pancras and its History," and at the same
time provides so vivid a sketch of the probable career of many another
witch, that I may be excused for quoting the extract at length:--

"This singular character, known as Mother Damnable, is also called
Mother Redcap and sometimes the Shrew of Kentish Town. Her father's
name was Jacob Bingham, by trade a brickmaker, in the neighbourhood of
Kentish Town. He enlisted in the army, and went with it to Scotland,
where he married a Scotch pedlar's daughter. They had one daughter,
this Mother Damnable. This daughter they named Jinney. Her father,
on leaving the army, took again to his old trade of brick-making,
occasionally travelling with his wife and child as a pedlar. When the
girl had reached her sixteenth year, she had a child by one Coulter,
who was better known as Gipsy George. This man lived no one knew how,
but he was a great trouble to the magistrates. Jinney and Coulter
after this lived together, but being brought into trouble for stealing
sheep from some lands near Holloway, Coulter was sent to Newgate,
tried at the Old Bailey, and hung at Tyburn. Jinney then associated
with one Darby, but this union produced a cat and dog life, for Darby
was constantly drunk; so Jinney and her mother consulted together;
Darby was suddenly missed, and no one knew whither he went. About this
time, her parents were carried before the justices for practising the
black art, and therewith causing the death of a maiden, for which
they were both hung. Jinney then associated herself with one Pitcher,
though who or what he was never was known; but after a time his body
was found crouched up in the oven, burnt to a cinder. Jinney was tried
for the murder, but acquitted because one of her associates proved he
had 'often got into the oven to hide himself from her tongue.' Jinney
was now a lone woman, for her former companions were afraid of her.
She was scarcely ever seen, or if she were it was at nightfall, under
the hedges or in the lane; but how she subsisted was a miracle to
her neighbours. It happened during the troubles of the Commonwealth
that a man, sorely pressed by his pursuers, got into her house by
the back-door, and begged on his knees for a night's lodging. He was
haggard in his countenance and full of trouble. He offered Jinney
money, of which he had plenty, and she gave him a lodging. This man,
it is said, lived with her many years, during which time she wanted
for nothing, though hard words and sometimes blows were heard from
her cottage. The man at length died, and an inquest was held on the
body, but, though everyone thought him poisoned, no proof could be
found, and so she again escaped harmless. After this Jinney never
wanted money, as the cottage she lived in was her own, built on waste
land by her father. Years thus passed, Jinney using her foul tongue
against everyone, and the rabble in return baiting her as if she were
a wild beast. The occasion of this arose principally from Jinney being
reputed a practiser of the black art--a very witch. She was resorted
to by numbers, as a fortune-teller and healer of strange diseases;
and when any mishap occurred, then the old crone was set upon by the
mob, and hooted without mercy. The old, ill-favoured creature would
at such times lean out of her hatch door, with a grotesque red cap on
her head. She had a large broad nose, heavy shaggy eyebrows, sunken
eyes, and lank and leathern cheeks; her forehead wrinkled, her mouth
wide, and her look sullen and unmoved. On her shoulders was thrown a
dark grey striped frieze with black patches, which looked at a distance
like flying bats. Suddenly she would let her huge black cat jump
upon the hatch by her side, when the mob instantly retreated from a
superstitious dread of the double foe."

The extraordinary death of this singular character is given in an old
pamphlet. "Hundreds of men, women, and children were witnesses of the
devil entering her house, in his very appearance and state, and that
although his return was narrowly watched for, he was not seen again;
and that Mother Damnable was found dead on the following morning,
sitting before the fireplace holding a crutch over it with a teapot
full of herbs, drugs, and liquid, part of which being given to the
cat, the hair fell off in two hours and the cat soon after died; that
the body was stiff when found and that the undertaker was obliged to
break her limbs before he could place them in the coffin, and that
the justices have put men in possession of the house to examine its
contents."

"Such is the history of this strange being whose name will ever be
associated with Camden Town, and whose reminiscence will ever be
revived by the old wayside house which, built on the site of the old
beldame's cottage, wears her head as the sign of the tavern."

Mother Redcap who, to judge from the above account, would have had
little cause of complaint had she suffered at the hands of the
executioner instead of those of the devil, was more fortunate than many
other London witches. Wapping, nowadays, is a sufficiently prosaic
spot. In the seventeenth century it was the abode of one Joan Peterson,
widely famous as the witch of Wapping. She was hanged at Tyburn in
1652 on evidence such as it must be confessed would nowadays scarcely
satisfy even a country J.P. trying a poacher. A black cat had alarmed
a woman by entering a house near Joan's abode. The woman consulted a
local baker, who replied that "on his conscience he thought it was old
Mother Peterson, for he had met her going towards the island a little
while before." He clenched the matter when giving evidence at the trial
by declaring that although he had never before been frightened by a
cat, the sight of this one had terrified him exceedingly. After which
no reasonable jury could entertain a doubt of Mother Peterson's guilt.
Fifty years before, as recorded in Sinclair's "Satan's Invisible World
Displayed," another notorious witch, Mother Jackson by name, was hanged
for having bewitched Mary Glover, of Thames Street, and similar cases
are common enough to show that the seventeenth-century Londoner was
as open to this form of the devil's assaults as he now is to others
more subtle. It is true that some professed victims of the black art
were proved to be impostors. Thus in 1574, as we learn from Stow,
Rachel Pinder and Agnes Briggs did penance at Paul's Cross for having
pretended to be diabolically possessed, vomiting pins and so forth,
much, no doubt, to the relief of the witch accused of besetting them.

The earliest English witch to attain any individual immortality was
she of Berkeley, who differed from most of her successors by being
extremely well off. Possibly because of this--for even in the ninth
century money had its value--she was accorded Christian burial, and the
prayers of the church thereafter. They were not, however, sufficient
to ensure her salvation, for under the very nose of the priest the
devil carried her body away from where it lay at the foot of the
high altar. Although sufficiently historical to have inspired one of
Southey's ballads, the Witch of Berkeley is a shadowy figure enough.
Another who, seeing that she was acquitted, does not perhaps deserve
to be here considered was Gideon, accused of sorcery by Agnes, wife of
the merchant Odo, in the tenth year of King John's reign. Although less
popular as a legendary figure, Gideon has a definite claim to regard in
that her trial is the first to be found in English legal records--the
"Abbrevatio Placitorum," quoted by Thomas Wright in his narrative of
sorcery and magic. It is satisfactory to know that Gideon, having
passed through the ordeal by red-hot iron, was acquitted in due course.

A famous witch was Margery Jourdemain, better known as the Witch of
Eye, who gains a reflected halo of respectability in that she was
burnt at Smithfield in 1441 as an accomplice of Eleanor of Gloucester,
elsewhere referred to. The Duchess of Bedford, charged in 1478 with
having bewitched Edward IV. by means of a leaden image "made lyke a man
of arms, conteyning the lengthy of a mannes finger, and broken in the
myddes and made fast with the wyre," as well as the unhappy Jane Shore,
come under the heading of political offenders against whom witchcraft
was alleged only as a side issue. More apt to our purpose, in that she
was charged with the offence of witchcraft only, and for it condemned
to death by Henry VIII., and executed at Tyburn in 1534, was Elizabeth
Barton of Aldington, better known as the Fair Maid of Kent. It is true
that she was a crazed enthusiast, suffering from a religious mania,
rather than a witch, and that she was, further, a pawn in a political
intrigue whereby the Catholic party endeavoured to influence the King's
matrimonial schemes.

Mother Demdyke, of Pendle Forest, in Lancashire, immortalised by
Harrison Ainsworth in "The Lancashire Witches," is elsewhere referred
to.

Elizabeth Sawyer, the Witch of Edmonton, though during her life gaining
only local fame, yet achieved the posthumous glory of providing Ford
and Dekker with the material for a play. In this, indeed, she did but
plagiarise Mr. Peter Fabell of the same town, otherwise known as the
Merry Devil of Edmonton, who there lived and died in Henry VIII.'s
reign, and upon whose pranks was founded the play called after him,
and long attributed to no less an author than Shakespeare. But whereas
Mr. Fabell was a sorcerer of no mean power, in that he successfully
cheated the devil and died in his bed, poor Elizabeth was no more than
a common witch, and as such came to the usual end. The manner of her
death in 1621 may be found in the chap-book published in that year
and entitled, "The Wonderfull Discoverie of Elizabeth Sawyer, A Witch
late of Edmonton: Her Conviction, Condemnation and Death: Together
with the relation of the Devil's Accesse to her and their Conference
together. Written by Henry Goodcole, Minister of the Word of God, and
her Continual Visitor in the Gaol of Newgate."




CHAPTER VII

THE WITCH OF ANTIQUITY


Such zealous sixteenth and seventeenth century dogmatists as King
James I., the Inquisitor Sprenger, Jean Bodin, or Pierre de Lancre
might have found it difficult to put forward satisfactory proof for
the cause in which they were briefed had it not been for the fortunate
existence of one quite unimpeachable witness--the direct command in
the book of Exodus, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live." Probably
no other sentence ever penned has been so destructive to human life
or so provocative of human misery; certainly it has provided Saladin
with the excuse for his bitter indictment of Christianity as being
_par excellence_, as based upon the Old Testament, the religion of
witchcraft. To which he adds that Christianity, now grown ashamed of
its former belief, seeks to explain it away by the suggestion that the
Hebrew word "chasaph" should be translated, not as "witch," but as
"poisoner."

It is, of course, as true as it was natural that Christian writers
on witchcraft seized eagerly upon definite Biblical authority for
the sin they were condemning. Origen, who protests against literal
interpretation of the Bible, is inclined to ascribe Biblical witchcraft
altogether to the Devil, basing his theory upon the tribulations of
Job. But St. Augustine needs no more definite proof for this variety of
sin than the Bible denunciation, while Luther and Calvin, in a later
age, are equally definite. At the same time, it is to be remembered
that the cult of witchcraft would certainly have existed had there
been no mention of it in the Bible at all. It is as universal,
as ubiquitous, and as enduring as the religious instinct itself;
Christianity did not invent the witch, it did but improve upon her. A
Biblical text was perhaps the most convincing evidence; failing it,
early Christian Fathers or late Inquisitors would have found little
difficulty in adducing a substitute. Even as it was, although they
quoted the Bible--and in both Old and New Testaments, from Genesis to
Revelations, witchcraft is recognised and condemned--they also referred
with equal zest to the great edifice of tradition and superstition
founded upon the struggles after celibacy of the early fathers and
their relegation of all pagan rites to the realms of Black Magic.

The Christians, in adopting to their own uses certain pagan rites and
beliefs, and regarding all the rest as witchcraft and an abominable
sin, were but following the example of their predecessors, the Jews.
Throughout the Old Testament Jehovah is proclaimed as the one and
only God, despite the backslidings to which the constant reiterations
of "Thou shalt have none other gods but Me" would, in the absence of
other record, be sufficient witness. The deities of other nations were
"false gods" and idols, being regarded by the Jew very much as were
witches and sorcerers by the Christian. Again and again he turned from
the one and only God to the gods of the heathen, just as the early
Christian was wont to help himself out with pagan rites when his new
faith failed him, a course of action which of late years shows signs
of a reviving popularity. Such being the case, it was as natural that
the great Jewish rulers should denounce to the furthest limits of their
vocabulary those who, religiously and politically, were undermining a
theocratic government, as that a modern Pope should hail the Italian
King accursed who seized upon the Patrimony.

The Jews had no national system of magic or witchcraft. Though Abraham
migrated to Canaan from Ur of the Chaldees, the God of Abraham was
sternly opposed to those beliefs and rites for which the Chaldeans
have ever since been famous. These they partly inherited from that
earlier Shumiro-Accadian people inhabiting the region between the
lower courses of the Tigris and the Euphrates, whose country they
invaded some forty centuries B.C. Besides peopling the universe with
good and evil spirits, and having knowledge of the arts of writing
and of metal-working, the Shumiro-Accadians practised sorcery and
magic wherewith to conjure evil spirits, reserving prayers in the more
ordinary sense of the word for the beneficent gods. At the coming of
the Chaldeans, the old religion was superseded by the worship of the
Sun-god Bel, whose priests were the first practising astrologers.
Astrology, divination, conjuration, and incantation thus all had their
part in the magico-religious practices of the Chaldeans. An elaborate
system of demonology provided constant menace to the happiness of the
poor Chaldeo-Babylonian, and, very naturally, by degrees he established
a counter influence by whose aid to obtain relief from his tormentors.
Most potent were the regular magicians, who, with elaborate ritual and
ceremony, were able to drive out the demons possessing the worshipper.
Such demons were controlled by the use of potions, by the tying of
knots wherewith to strangle them, or by such incantations as the
following:--

 They have used all kinds of charms to entwine me as with ropes,...
 But I, by command of Marduk, the lord of charms,
 By Marduk the master of bewitchment,
 Both the male and the female witch,
 As with ropes I will entwine,
 As in a cage I will catch,
 As with cords I will tie,
 As in a net I will overpower,
 As in a sling I will twist,
 As a fabric I will tear,
 With dirty water as from a well I will fill,
 As a wall throw them down.

Side by side with the regular magicians was a vast host of sorcerers
practising without elaborate ritual, amongst whom witches were greatly
in the ascendant. These same Babylonian and Assyrian witches were as
efficient as they were unamiable. In contradistinction to the magician,
the witch was in league with the demons, and ably assisted them in the
infliction of bad dreams, misfortune, disease and death itself. With
enthusiasm worthy of a better cause, she tore her victims' hair and
clothes, brought about delusions or lasting insanity, destroyed family
concord, and aroused hatred between lovers. She was past-mistress
in the use of the evil eye, the evil mouth, and the evil tongue,
of effigies and magic knots, while her imprecations were the most
dreaded of all her practices. Of the witches of Babylon we are told
that they haunted the streets and public places, beset wayfarers,
and forced their way into houses. Their tongues brought bewitchment,
their lips breathed poison, death attended their footsteps. Whether
as originators or adaptors they were extremely proficient in that
method of enchantment by means of clay, wood, or dough figures, which
has continued as among the most familiar of witch-arts until our own
times, and they were adepts in the tying of witch-knots. Naturally
enough, such practices gained for them the unfriendly attention of the
government, but it is perhaps significant of the dread inspired by
them that although the law provided for their execution by fire, there
is no definite proof that anything other than their effigies was ever
actually burnt.

Considering the superstitions amid which their great forefather had
been brought up, it was scarcely surprising that the monotheistic ideal
peculiar to the Jews should have suffered occasional eclipses. Nor were
Chaldean magic and Persian Zoroastrianism alone responsible for the
Jewish conception of witchcraft. In time of famine Abraham and his wife
went down into Egypt, just as did his descendants, and the Egyptian
magician has earned for himself a fame no less enduring than has the
Chaldean. Thot, who revealed himself to man as the first magician,
was their divine patron--and it is significant that he also first
taught mankind the arts of writing and of music, to say nothing of
arithmetic, geometry, medicine, and surgery. This divine schoolmaster
pointed out in advance days of ill-omen, and, his magical arts making
him master of the other gods, provided counteracting remedies. The
Egyptian magician interpreted dreams, cured demoniacal possession,
and was skilled in casting nativities. In less amiable mood, he could
send nightmares, harass with spectres, constrain the wills of men,
and cause women to fall victims to infatuations. For the composition
of an irresistible charm he required no more than a drop of his
subject's blood, some nail-parings, hair, or a scrap of linen from his
raiment--to be incorporated in the wax of a doll modelled and clothed
to resemble him or her. As with the Babylonian witch and her mediæval
successors, anything done to the effigy was suffered by the original.
Thot also taught the magicians how to divide the waters, and a pleasant
story has been preserved of a fair maiden who dropped a new turquoise
ornament from a boat into the river, and, appealing in her distress to
an amiable magician, was consoled by finding it, he having divided the
waters for her, safe and sound on a potsherd. It is not difficult to
trace to a similar origin the Jewish legend of the Red Sea passage.

Isis, another prominent protector of witchcraft, was, in fact, more
witch than goddess. An Egyptian formula against disease, dating from
about 1700 B.C., commences, "O Isis, mistress of sorceries, deliver me,
set me free from all bad, evil (red) things." Red, it may be noted,
was the colour of Set, and thus of evil. Woman was, indeed, supposed
to possess more completely than man the qualities necessary for the
exercise of magic, legitimate or otherwise. She saw and heard that
which the eyes and ears of man could not perceive; her voice, being
more flexible and piercing, was heard at greater distances. She was by
nature mistress of the art of summoning or banishing invisible beings.
The "great spouse," or Queen, of Pharaoh attained, upon her accession
to such rank, magical powers above the ordinary. In this connection
we find another conception of the witch in the sequel to the loss of
Pharaoh's army in the Red Sea. The women and slaves of the drowned
warriors, fearing aggressions from the Kings of Syria and the West,
elected as their queen one Dalūkah, a woman wise, prudent, and skilled
in magic. She collected all the secrets of Nature in the temples and
performed her sorceries at the moment when the celestial bodies were
most likely to be amenable to a higher power. Whenever an army set
out from Arabia or Assyria for the invasion of Egypt, the Witch-Queen
made effigies of soldiers and animals corresponding in numbers to its
strength, as ascertained by her spies. These she caused to disappear
beneath the ground--a fate which thereupon befell the invaders also.

The Egyptians were very learned in the concoction of love-charms,
spells, and philtres, a branch of their profession which we may suppose
to have appealed more to the witch than to the magician. On at least
one occasion a witch gained a notable victory over a male competitor
in this direction, for it is recorded that Prince Setnau, familiar
from his birth with all the magical arts, was yet bewitched by a very
beautiful woman named Tabubu--an occurrence which, if not altogether
unique in history, vouches for the potency of the lady's charms.

The use of love-philtres was common among the Jewish women, and it is
probable that, with other magical operations, they borrowed it from
the Egyptians. Nevertheless, Jewish references to Egyptian magic are
somewhat scornful. Thus, in the divination of Pharaoh's dreams, a
Jew triumphs over the best efforts of the Court magicians. When the
Egyptian sorcerers cast down their rods in emulation of the magic
powers exercised by Aaron, their rods changed into serpents as readily
as did his. But his superiority was made manifest by the fact that his
serpent devoured all the rest. So, too, Nebuchadnezzar, in his own
realm, found Daniel and his three friends more than able to hold their
own against the local magicians and astrologers.

The Jew, then, was no less apt in magic than were his contemporaries.
Where it differed was that it was only legitimate when practised in the
name and for the service of the God of Abraham, any attempt towards
making use of alien rites or deities being sternly repressed.

The Babylonian captivity served to strengthen and extend the
full-blooded belief in a comprehensive system of demons already
inherited by the Hebrews. They recognised two varieties of evil
spirits--the fallen angels and those who were but semi-supernatural.
These latter were again divided into the offspring of Eve by certain
male spirits and those descended from Adam by Lilith, the first
really Jewish witch. Nor were the Jews slow to test the benevolence
of such beings whenever the severity of Jehovah proved irksome. Saul
banished from the land all wizards and those who had familiar spirits.
Nevertheless, being on one occasion afraid of the Philistines, and
unable to obtain favourable assurances from Jehovah either by dreams,
by Urim, or by the prophets, he disguised himself and came by night to
the witch of Endor. The apparition of Samuel has given rise to much
speculation. Wierus, an enlightened sixteenth century writer, though a
firm believer in witchcraft withal, holds that the Devil himself took
the form of Samuel for the occasion. But Wierus is essentially humane,
and his contemporaries held much less charitable views of the women
they regarded as servants of Satan.

Although the idea of a personal Devil was familiar to the Jews--as,
for instance, in his trial of strength with Jehovah for the allegiance
of Job--we find no mention of his having entered into compacts with
witches as in later times. On the other hand, they had dealings with
familiar spirits, and, as was natural in a nation distinguished by its
genius for prophecy, they excelled in divination. The early law is
very severe on the subject. The law-abiding Jew might, indeed, attempt
to unravel the future so long as he confined his investigations to
legitimate channels. These included dreams, prophecies, and Urim and
Thummim, two stones carried in the pocket of the High Priest's ephod,
engraved with an affirmative and a negative respectively, one of which
being taken out, the message upon the other represented the Divine
will. All these, being in connection with the service of Jehovah, were
permissible. On the other hand, we read in Leviticus that "a man also
or a woman that hath a familiar spirit or that is a wizard shall surely
be put to death. They shall stone them with stones." And again, "Regard
not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards to be
defiled by them." Saul died not only for transgressing "against the
word of the Lord, which he kept not," but also for asking counsel of
"one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire of it." His further sin
would seem to have been that in his perplexity "he enquired not of the
Lord."

Manasseh (about the eighth century) incurred condemnation because "he
made his children to pass through the fire," practised augury and
sorcery, used enchantments, "and dealt with them that had familiar
spirits and with wizards." Nor was it until the Lord punished him by
causing him to be carried captive to Babylon that he humbled himself
and "knew that the Lord He was God." Regarded as a preventative, this
form of punishment is curious enough, seeing that the daughters of
Babylon are vehemently accused of the very crime for which Manasseh
was sent among them. Isaiah says, in no doubtful terms, that "the
daughters of Babylon are to be punished for the multitude of sorceries
and enchantments with which they have laboured from their youth." And
throughout Jewish history the influence of these Babylonian witches is
noticeable.

Love-magic was practised in Israel almost entirely by women, and many
of the Jewish feminine ornaments were amatorial charms. Indeed, the
demand for charms of all kinds was as great among the monotheistic
Hebrews as their neighbours. To quote one example out of many, a charm
very popular with Jewish mothers against Lilith, the witch of darkness,
much feared by women in travail as having an evil propensity for
stealing new-born babes, was to write upon the walls the names of three
angels, Senoi, Sensenoi, and Semangelof.

Despite the wide sway of the evil and the severity of the laws
against it, spasmodically enforced by several of the kings, as Saul
and Hezekiah, there are no definite records of witch-persecutions
comparable to those of mediæval Christianity until the reign of King
Alexander Jannai, in the first century B.C. Between 79 and 70 B.C.
Simon ben Schetach caused eighty witches to be hanged. After the birth
of Christ but a few instances are recorded, although the Apostle of the
Gentiles waged war against witchcraft with considerable energy. Thus by
virtue of his superior powers he brought about the blindness of Elymas,
the sorcerer who practised in the island of Paphos. At this early date
a distinction was made between the witch active and those involuntarily
possessed of evil spirits, a distinction too fine to be regarded by the
mediæval Inquisitor. Thus the maid "having a spirit of divination" was
not held criminally responsible for her powers. Her soothsaying brought
her little or no personal gain, and, far from committing voluntarily
"the abominable sinne of witchcraft," she was dominated by a spirit,
subsequently cast out by Saint Paul by means less drastic than might
have been the case fifteen centuries later.

It is, at first sight, surprising that the Chaldean, Egyptian, or
Jewish witch should have conformed so closely to the type familiarised
by the witch-mania of the Middle Ages. If we remember, however, how
great a proportion of Christian superstitions are directly descended
from Hebrew practices, and how eagerly those who made it their
life-work to harry old women in the name of the Lord sought Biblical
precedent, this persistence in type becomes natural enough, unique
though it be. The conception of the Power who guides the universe must
vary according to human conceptions of what composes that universe,
but so long as we are afraid of the dark the foundations upon which we
build our manifestations of evil need vary little.




CHAPTER VIII

THE WITCH IN GREECE AND ROME


Although the Christian witch was the direct descendant of the Jewish,
there were yet other branches of her family tree not without their
influence upon her final development. Chief among them were the great
witch families of Greece and Rome, the one being in some sense a
development of the other and through it inheriting more than a trace of
Persian blood.

It is a natural feature of anthropomorphic religion that from a few
representatives of the more important phases of human existence the
gods and goddesses tend to increase, until there is hardly a department
of human activity without its presiding deity. As there are kings and
queens among men, so there will be sovereigns among the gods. The
divine king will have his officers, servants and warriors just as do
those earthly kings who worship him. The personal appearance of the god
differs from that of the man only in degree, his connection with his
worshippers is almost undignified in the closeness of his intimacy.
He suffers the same passions, commits the same crimes, occasionally
aspires to the same virtues; he is, in a word, man in all but name and
divine only in his humanity.

Among no people was this tendency more highly and minutely developed
than among the Greeks. Not only did their deities adapt themselves
to every phase of human life; the famous altar to "the Unknown God,"
attests the limitless potentialities of the Greek Pantheon. Were all
other records destroyed we could exactly reconstruct Grecian life and
feeling from the doings of the Grecian gods; we may expect to find
accordingly such a phase of belief as witchcraft accurately mirrored
in Grecian mythology. And, accordingly, the witch proves to have her
definite niche in the Greek Pantheon. Naturally also, she did not rank
among the greater goddesses. On the one hand she may be looked for as
the degenerate form of a goddess; on the other she corresponds nearly
enough to the heroic demigods in whose veins royal blood mingled with
divine ichor.

To the first category belongs the dire and dreadful form of Hecate.
Originally an ancient Thracian divinity, she by degrees assumed
the attributes of many, Atis, Cybele, Isis, and others. As the
personification of the moon, whose rays serve but to increase the
mystery of night, she was the patroness of all witches, and was invoked
on all their most baleful undertakings. Gradually she grew into the
spectral originator of all those horrors with which darkness affects
the imagination. Hecate it was who first cast spells and became
learned in enchantments; Hecate who at the approach of night loosed
demons and phantoms from the lower shades. Did you, hastening through
the twilight, meet with a formless monster, hoofed like an ass and
radiating a stench incomparably foul, you might recognise the handiwork
of Hecate--designed, perhaps, to punish you for having neglected to
offer on her altars your accustomed sacrifice of dogs, or honey, or
black lambs, or to set out her monthly offering of food--perhaps only
in wanton exercise of her mysterious power. Did the mournful baying of
your kennelled hounds lend point to the gloomy solitude of night, you
might know that Hecate was abroad upon the earth somewhere at hand,
with dead souls to form her retinue. Must you pass the cross-roads, or
visit the place of tombs, hasten, and especially beware the spot where
the blood of murdered persons has been spilt, for all such places are
Hecate's chosen haunts. In the gloom and darkness she did her grisly
work, now brewing philtres, now potions, with reptiles, human flesh or
blood of man or beast that had died dreadful deaths for her ingredients.

The rites of Hecate worship varied in different parts of Greece; she
plays a leading part in the Orphic poems, and when the old religion
began to be submerged beneath foreign elements, she yet held her own
and was even invoked by strangers. Her statues were erected before
the houses and at the cross-roads in Athens, and such Hecatea were
consulted as oracles. Her personal appearance was the reverse of
attractive. She had either three bodies or three heads, according to
time and circumstance, one being of a horse, the second of a dog, the
third of a lion. Although usual, this habit of body was not constant,
her magic arts allowing her to take whatever form she chose as freely
as could her fellow divinities. But however she appeared she was
invariably hideous. Nevertheless, there seem to have been those among
her votaries bold enough to desire personal interviews with her, and
for their benefit she provided a formula of her own composition and
of such power that she was constrained to obey the citation of those
availing themselves of it. It may be quoted for the benefit of those
readers who desire her closer acquaintance. Make a wooden statue of
the root of the wild rue, well-polished, and anoint it with the bodies
of little common lizards crushed into a paste with myrrh, storax, and
incense. Leave it in the open air during the waxing of the moon, and
then (presumably at full moon) speak as follows:-- "Come, infernal,
terrestrial and celestial Bombo, goddess of the highways and the
cross-ways, enemy of the light who walkest abroad at night, friend and
companion of the night, thou who delightest in the barking of dogs
and in the shedding of blood, who wanderest amongst the shades and
about the tombs, thou who desirest blood and who bringest terror unto
mortals--Gorgo, Mormo, moon of a thousand forms, cast a propitious eye
upon our sacrifices." Then take as many lizards as Hecate has forms and
fail not to make a grove of laurel boughs, the laurels having grown
wild. Then, having addressed fervent prayers to the image, you will see
her.

Hecate, who became the mother of Scylla, and, according to some
accounts also of Medea and of Circe, was arch-mistress of the knowledge
of herbs and simples, more especially of poisons. She is almost more
typical of the later developments of the witch than of those of her own
times. Hag-like and horrible, she worked only for evil, inspiring her
votaries with that terror which she herself personified. Goddess though
she be, she provides a poignant illustration of one characteristic
of the Greek Pantheon which it shares with no other. Its gods and
goddesses are always a little more human than their votaries, more
prone to human weaknesses if not to human virtues. Thus Hecate shows
herself more horrible and terror-breeding than any of those who did
their best to model themselves upon her. Just as Mars represented
the soldier, carried to his logical conclusion, so Hecate represents
the witch conception carried to its furthest limits--the concentrated
essence of witchcraft.

To the class of semi-divine witches belong those of Thessaly, as well
as Medea and Circe, the putative daughters of Hecate, from whom they
learned their magic arts. Circe was assisted by four attendant witches,
who gathered for her the herbs wherewith she might brew such potions
as turned the companions of Ulysses into swine. The influence of Medea
was, on the whole, more benign. She cured Hercules of madness, and
taught the Marubians the decidedly useful accomplishment of fascinating
and subduing venomous serpents. Not that her knowledge of ointments,
poisonous and otherwise, was in any way inferior to that of her sister.
Euripides represents her as invoked in terms almost identical with
those already quoted in connection with Hecate. The love-sick maiden,
Simaetha, in the second Idyll of Theocritus, appeals to Hecate to "make
this medicine of mine no less potent than the spells of Circe, or of
Medea, or of Perimede of the golden hair."

Equally skilled in poison were the witches of Thessaly, who could,
moreover, draw down the moon out of the sky by their magic songs and
philtres. If less awful than Hecate, their proceedings inspired equally
little confidence. They were addicted, for example, to such practices
as tearing off with their teeth flesh from the faces of the dead,
for the concoction of their spells. To prevent this early variant of
body snatching, dead bodies had to be watched by night. To circumvent
the watchers, the witches, as we learn from Apuleius, took the form
of dogs, mice, or flies, so that the guardians of the dead must look
neither to the right nor to the left, nor even wink while on duty.

Nor were such grisly exploits confined to Thessaly, for in Syria, as
Marcassus tells us, troops of witches haunted the battle-field during
the night, devouring the bodies of the slain. During the day they took
the shape of wolves or hyenas, thus providing a link with the more
common phases of lycanthropy. These same witches were definitely human
beings, as distinct from spirits, and it was comparatively easy for
anyone who so wished, and could obtain the necessary recipe, to follow
their example. Such magic salves were usually composed of narcotics,
among them being aconite, belladonna, opium, and hyoscyamus, boiled
down with the fat of a little child, murdered for the purpose, and
with the blood of a bat added. They needed careful and expert usage,
however, lest such a mischance might befall as occurred to "the Golden
Ass," who, seeking to become an owl, found himself to be no more than a
donkey.

While the Thessalian witches paid more attention to the toxicological
aspect of Hecate's teaching, the pythons exploited one no less
important--the prediction of events to come. Every prudent Greek
consulted the oracle at Delphi, before undertaking anything of
importance--the oracle displaying equal prudence in the non-committal
vagueness of her replies. Theseus, who, on the death of his father,
wished to introduce a new form of Government in Athens, sought advice
thereon, and received as his answer:--

 Son of the Pitthean maid,
 To your town the terms and fates
 My father gives of many states.
 Be not anxious or afraid,
 The bladder will not fail to swim
 On the waves that compass him.

To Philip of Macedon, again, the utterance of the Pythian priestess
ran:--

 The Battle on Thermodon that shall be
 Safe at a distance I desire to see.
 Far like an eagle watching in the air,
 Conquered shall weep, and conqueror perish there.

That even oracles were--and perhaps are--open to human influence may be
deduced from Demosthenes' irreverent suggestion that the prophetess had
been tampered with in Philip's favour.

The manner of delivering an oracle doubtless gave a ritualistic
example to the witches of later ages, and, as such, may be quoted.
After the offering of certain sacrifices, the priestess took her
seat on a tripod placed over a fissure in the ground at the centre
of the temple. From this came forth an intoxicating gas which, when
she breathed it, caused her to utter wild, whirling words. These were
interpreted by the attendant priest and by him handed to the applicant,
having been first written down in hexameters by an official poet.
Divination in Greece thus owed as much to the witch as to the goddess,
and it should be noted that, in the case of the Delphic oracle at any
rate, the priest acted as go-between, the Pythia being only an item of
the oracular machinery.

The Persian wars brought new influences to bear upon Greek religion in
general and witchcraft in particular. With Darius and Xerxes came the
magic practised by the followers of Zoroaster. Pliny has it that Xerxes
was accompanied by Osthanes, a writer on magic, and this statement,
whether or no correct in itself, expresses a general truth. Later,
after the Greek irruptions into Persia and Assyria, the Chaldeans
effected a peaceful occupation of Greece to such effect that "Chaldean"
came to be synonymous with doctor, magician, or sorcerer. Like those
of their descendants whose advertisements make the fortunes of our
newspaper proprietors to-day, they cured sufferers from incurable
diseases, provided, for a small fee, infallible recipes for making
money quickly, and acted as mediators between heaven and such offenders
as could not approach it through the regular channels with any hope of
success. Naturally, also, they did not neglect such a popular "line"
as prophecy, sometimes for distinguished clients, as, for example, the
father of Euripides, who is said to have consulted a Chaldean as to
his son's destiny. In a word, they took the place of quack-doctors,
palmists, "get-rich-quickly" colleges, and the various other
practitioners in allied branches of swindling, whose operations to-day
are generally hailed as remarkable instances of American "cuteness" and
originality.

That the Greek witch of the older school should be powerfully
influenced by such innovators was natural enough, the more so that in
Chaldea women took a foremost part in practising the more evil kinds
of magic. Accordingly, we may accept the date of the Persian Wars as
that in which commenced a change in the whole character of Grecian
witchcraft. The witch became less terrible in that she was less
spiritual, but more pernicious in that she dabbled more with material
evil. Hecate was a sufficiently awesome figure, but her terrors were
more or less impartial in their scope, and might affect one man as well
as another, did he happen to come into contact with them. The witch
of later times concentrated her malignancy upon a particular object,
and thus became the apt instrument of private vengeance and a force
definitely detrimental to social weal.

Yet another powerful influence upon Greek magic was exerted by Egypt.
Witchcraft and astrology after the Egyptian method were held in as high
respect as were those of the Chaldean convention, and Nectanebus, the
last native King of Egypt (about 350 B.C.), was acknowledged in Hellas
as the most redoubtable of the magicians. He was an adept in the use
of waxen images, and among those to whom he sent dreams was Philip of
Macedon.

Thus with the gradual rise of astrology in Greece and the decay of
the old religion a state of things arose very similar to what is
even now taking place--the nations of the East coming under the
influence of Grecian culture, and in return providing her with new
cults and crazes, one more fantastic than the other, but all seized
upon with equal avidity by the hungry Hellenic intellect, craving
always for some new thing. From comparatively simple beginnings Greek
witchcraft added always to its complexity until it included everything
popularly associated with the name, including a full understanding
of hallucinations, dreams, demoniacal possession, exorcism, and
divination, the use of wax images and useful poisons, mostly from
Eastern sources, and with them a very nice understanding of philtres.
A good example of a love charm is to be found in Theocritus, writing
in the first decades of the third century B.C. Among the charms of
which the heroine of his idyll avails herself to bring about the
return of her faithless lover are laurel-leaves, bright red wool, and
witch-knots--this last a distinctively Babylonian practice. The charm
has a recurrent refrain of "My magic wheel, bring back to me the man
I love." Barley grains must then be scattered in the fire while the
following spell is intoned:--

 'Tis the bones of Delphis (or another) I am scattering.

 Delphis troubled me, and I against Delphis am burning this laurel.
 Even as it crackles loudly, when it has caught the flame, and suddenly
 is burned up, and we see not even the dust thereof, lo! even thus may
 the flesh of Delphis waste in the burning.

 Even as I melt this wax, with the god to aid, so speedily may he by
 love be molten.

 Three times do I pour libations, and thrice my Lady Moon, I speak this
 spell. Be it with a friend he lingers, be it with a leman that he
 lies, may he as clean forget them as Theseus of old did utterly forget
 the fair-tressed Ariadne.

 Coltsfoot is an Arcadian weed that maddens on the hills the young
 stallions and fleet-footed mares: Ah, even as these may I see Delphis.

 This fringe from his cloak Delphis has lost, that now I shred and cast
 into the flame....

 Lo, I will crush an eft, and a venomous draught to-morrow I will bring
 thee.

 But now, Thestylis, take these magic herbs and secretly smear the
 juice on the jambs of his gate-and spit and whisper, 'Tis the bones of
 Delphis that I smear.

 When first I saw Delphis I fell sick of love, and consulted every
 wizard and every crone, &c., &c.

Here, then, we have a detailed account of practices identical
with those such as subsequently became the object of fierce
persecutions--the use of effigies, of magic herbs, the burning of some
substance while calling the name of the person to be influenced, the
using of a fragment of his personal belongings to his detriment, the
consulting with "crones" for the satisfaction of love-cravings. It was,
however, too closely related to religion for there to be any continuous
expression of unfavourable public opinion. At the same time, laws
existed against it, subsequently to find an echo in Roman legislation.
Theoris, "the Lemnian woman," as Demosthenes calls her, was publicly
tried in Athens and burned as a witch. Demoniacal possession and
exorcism were believed in at least as early as 330 B.C., in which year
Demosthenes refers to them in an oration. His feeling towards the
practice of exorcism may be deduced from his reproaching Æschinus as
being the son of a woman who gained her living as an exorcist. Plato,
in the Laws, decrees:--"If any by bindings-down or allurements or
incantations or any such-like poisonings whatever appear to be like one
doing an injury, if he be a diviner or interpreter of miracles, let him
be put to death."

But despite such minor inconveniences, the Greek witch had little to
fear in the way of persecutions, so that her mediæval successors might
well have looked back to the days of ancient Hellas as their Golden
Age, alike spiritually and materially.

If the Greeks, who recognised no predecessors in the possession of
their country, yet imported so much of their witchcraft from abroad,
it is little to be wondered at that the Romans, by their own account
foreign settlers in Italy, should have done so. Unlike those of Greece,
Roman legends provide a definite beginning for Rome itself. The city
was founded by a foreigner. What more likely than that he should bring
with him the customs, cults, and superstitions of his own country.

Granting that the pious Æneas ever existed, we may also suppose that
he was responsible for the Roman tendency in things magical. Of
Greek magic he would have learned enough--and to spare--in the long
ten years' warring on the plains of Ilium. From Dido also he might
well have learned something. Virgil himself was by popular report
familiar with all the laws of witchcraft, and Virgil tells us of
Dido's acquaintance, if not with witchcraft, at least with a witch of
unquestioned eminence. Half-priestess, half-enchantress, she could
cause rivers to run backwards, to say nothing of knowing the most
secret thoughts of men. Certainly if Æneas wished to introduce a
reliable system of witchcraft into his adopted country, he could have
gone to no better instructress.

As in Greece, so in Rome, the personal character of the witch was
identical in some respects with that of the goddess, so as to be
frequently indistinguishable. Egeria, the friend and counsellor of
Numa, was the first witch altogether worthy of the name. The Vestal
Virgins were also possessed of certain magical powers. An old French
authority disposes of them summarily as thorough-going servants of
Satan, his zeal outrunning his sense of chronological fitness. He adds
that when Tuscia was accused of having broken her vow of chastity,
Satan assisted her to prove her innocence by carrying water in a
sieve--an expedient which would have certainly caused her to be burnt
two thousand years later.

Like the pythoness of Greece, the Roman sibyl was priestess as well as
witch. The existence of the famous Sibylline books presupposes culture
above the ordinary; she was also a student of medicine, and, in later
times, more particularly of poisons. This latter art became in time a
fashionable craze, as we may gather from the many laws enacted against
poisoners, and Livy, in common with many other male writers, believes
that poisoning and superstition alike originated with women. He also,
descending to particulars, relates how Publicia and Licinia divorced
their husbands expeditiously by poison, two instances out of many
quoted by Latin writers.

In the comprehensive provisions of the Laws of the Twelve Tables
drawn up by the Duumvirs in the fifth century B.C., witchcraft is not
overlooked.

 He shall be punished who enchants the corn;
 Do not charm the corn of others;
 Do not enchant,

are among some of its injunctions.

Roman morality being enforced upon social rather than religious
grounds, witchcraft was forbidden only in so far as it was considered
a pernicious influence within the State. Even in later times, when
various kinds of magic were prohibited, magical rites for curing
diseases and protecting the harvest from hail, snow, or tempest were
not only allowed, but even encouraged. The Lex Cornelia de Sicariis
et Veneficis provided against offering sacrifice in order to injure a
neighbour. The maleficent sorcerer could be burned alive, and those
who consulted him or her were liable to crucifixion. The possession
of magical books was made criminal, and the administration of
love-philtres was punishable by labour in the mines, or, in the case
of persons of rank, by a fine. This contrasts with the earlier laws,
which were interpreted in a far more liberal spirit and only enforced
in extreme cases.

Already in the early days of the Laws of the Twelve Tables, Greek
influence on Roman witchcraft was noticeable--it increased in
proportion as Greek thought extended its sway over the Roman mind. By
way of Greece also, as well as through independent channels, Oriental
magic found its way to Rome, where the wisdom of the Egyptians was held
in as high regard as in Greece itself. By the time of Marius, when
the Romans had come into direct relations with the East, Chaldeans,
sacrificers and interpreters of the Sibylline books positively swarmed
in the city, while the use of love-philtres and waxen images was become
among the commonplaces of every-day life.

How early Diana, whose close connection with the moon places her on a
par with Hecate, came to be regarded as queen of the witches may be
doubted; later Italian legends and customs are unanimous in according
her that questionable honour. That must at least be a late conception
which regards her as a constant visitor to the Witches' Sabbath, along
with her daughter Herodias! Many such legends are still current in
Tuscany, where, in common with other parts of Italy and Europe, Diana
was worshipped long after Christianity was nominally supreme. The
Italian "strege" are the direct descendants of the Latin "striges,"
who took their name from a bird of ill-omen that flies by night, the
screech-owl, and witchcraft is still known to its votaries as "la
vecchia religione," while actual belief in the old gods still survives
in one form or other in many parts of the Peninsula.

It may here be noted that Herodias' father is sometimes said to have
been no other than Lucifer. She also appears under the name of Aradia.
Diana sends her to sojourn for a time on earth:--

 Thou must go to earth below
 To be a teacher unto women and men
 Who would fain study witchcraft.
 And thou shalt be the first of witches,
 And thou shalt teach the art of poisoning,
 And thou shalt teach how to ruin the crops of a rich peasant.
 How to be revenged upon a priest.
 Double the harm and do it in the name of Diana,
 Queen of Witches all.

And Aradia taught mortals:--

 To bless or curse with power friends or foes,
 To converse with spirits,
 To find hidden treasure in ancient ruins,
 To conjure the spirits of priests who died leaving treasure,
 To understand the voice of the wind,
 To change water into wine,
 To divine with cards,
 To show the secrets of the hand,
 To cure diseases,
 To make the ugly beautiful,
 To tame wild beasts.

Little cakes of meal, salt, honey and water are still made in the shape
of Diana's horned moon, and are baked after an incantation to the
goddess.

There are, of course, earlier indications than these of Diana's
patronage of witchcraft. Thus Horace, in his Ode to Canidia, written in
the first century B.C., puts these words into the mouth of Canidia, the
witch:--

 Oh, night and Dian who with true
 And friendly eyes my purpose view,
 And guardian silence keep whilst I
 My secret orgies safely ply,
 Assist me now, now on my foes
 With all your wrath celestial close.

In the same ode Horace details many witch-customs, which serve to
mirror the witch superstitions of the time:--

 Canidia with dishevelled hair,
 And short crisp vipers coiling there
 Beside a fire of Colchos stands
 And her attendant hags commands.

For her fire she makes use of fig-trees torn from dead men's
sepulchres, cypress, eggs rubbed over with the envenomed gore of
"filthy toads," screech-owl's plumes, evil herbs, and fleshless bones
snatched by a witch from the jaws of starving dogs. The smell from such
cookery must have been deadly enough in itself to kill any number of
victims, even though it does not altogether explain why she bites her
long, sharp, unpared thumb-nail while brewing her deadly potion.

However universal in its appeal, love was by no means the only disease
for which witchcraft provided its remedy. According to Cato, for
example, dislocation of a joint could be cured by the utterance of the
following charm:--

 Motas, danata, daries, dardaries, astataries.

To which Pliny adds that it must be used in conjunction with split
reeds, a prudent suggestion enough. From him also we may learn
particulars of other charms in common use. Love-philtres were composed
of wild parsnip or mandrake, while the external application of asses'
fat mixed with gander grease was a means of making certainty more sure.
Amateur gardeners with a taste for early rising may be interested to
know of a cure for the caterpillar pest:--A woman (presumably the
gardener's wife) is to walk at a particular season round the tree
affected before sunrise, ungirt and barefoot. And so on, a remedy being
provided for all the ills that flesh is heir to.

The Emperors held widely divergent views on the matter of witchcraft.
Augustus, realising its hold upon the popular imagination, collected
the verses of the sibyls from Samos, Troy, Africa, and elsewhere, and
ordered them to be submitted to the prefects of the city, there to be
judged and reported on by fifteen very learned men. During the latter
days of Pagan Rome there was a marked revival of witchcraft, Marcus
Aurelius and Julian setting the example by their patronage. The earlier
Christian Emperors revived the old laws against it, but diverted
them to attack the old religion. The secret magic condemned by the
Duumvirs was by them extended to cover the whole system of paganism.
Almost immediately after his conversion Constantine decreed that any
haruspex (diviner) entering a citizen's house with the intention of
celebrating his rites should be burned alive, while the property of his
employer should be confiscated and his accuser rewarded. The Emperor
showed that he was in earnest by ordering the execution of one of his
favourites for having caused bad weather and prevented his corn-traffic
with Constantinople. It was, nevertheless, declared some two years
later that the Emperor had no desire to prohibit such magical rites as
cured disease or prevented bad weather. In the reign of his successor,
Constantius, any person accused of witchcraft was liable to be put to
torture. Proven sorcerers were ordered to be thrown to wild beasts or
crucified, while, if they persisted in denying their offence, their
flesh was to be torn from their bones with iron hooks. This edict
also differentiated between Black and White Magic; magic charms being
permitted as remedies for drought, disease, storms, and the like.

Julian the Apostate, perhaps not unnaturally, regarded sorcery with a
more favourable eye, but later emperors showed themselves always more
inimical. Valentian added impious prayers and midnight sacrifices to
the list of things forbidden; under Theodosius every detail of pagan
worship was included under the heading of magic, and as such rigorously
forbidden. In the reign of Honorius, the Sibylline verses collected by
Augustus were suppressed. The Codex Justinianus devotes a whole title
to witchcraft.

The history of the Roman witch is thus prophetic of that of her
Christian successor. So long as she was subject to the civil power
alone she suffered little interference from the State, but as soon as
she aroused the jealous attention of the more orthodox interpreters of
the supernatural, her doom was sealed. We are apt to boast great things
of the increase of knowledge in our time, and to instance the decay of
superstition in evidence, but, were a sudden religious revival to take
place at all comparable to the birth-throes of early Christianity or
the Reformation, it is doubtful whether we should not find a belief
in the wicked prowess of the witch revive along with it, and possibly
our spiritual pastors and masters among the first to attack it with
temporal weapons. It is difficult to see how they could logically
refrain.




CHAPTER IX

FROM PAGANISM TO CHRISTIANITY


Seeing that it affects ourselves so considerably, we are in the habit
of proclaiming the introduction of Christianity as the greatest
revolution in history--a claim which will be more capable of
demonstration when a few more thousand years have passed, and a few
more religions have waxed and waned. At least, the mind of the cultured
"Christian" of to-day varies little in its outlook--save in so far
as it is affected by modern material discoveries--from that of the
cultured "Pagan" of Imperial Rome, much less, indeed, than do either
of them from the earnest Early Christian. The ovine tendency of human
nature makes it inevitable that a few sincere believers--whatever
their belief--will always attain a comet-like tail of followers,
hypnotised by their earnestness, and themselves understanding very
little about it. However it may have been with the small band of early
Christians--whose belief was given reality by their sufferings in its
cause--one may be sure that the ideas of the sixth century Christian
in the village street upon Heaven, Hell, and their denizens, differed
only in the change of a few names, and the addition of some intolerance
from those of his pagan ancestor six centuries before. His spiritual
advisers bade him worship the names of Christ, St. John, and St. Peter,
in place of Apollo, Mercury, or Mars, and he, troubling his head about
very little but his means of daily livelihood, accepted the change
without demur. Meanwhile his mind--such as it was--worked along its
old lines. As in all great religious movements, we find no sudden or
violent change--except, of course, in individual cases--the older ideas
were abandoned, in name, though only very slowly, and the change from
Diana to Christ, so far as it affected the great bulk of worshippers,
was mentally imperceptible.

There were many Christians before Christ, just as there were many
pagans after the death of Paganism. For centuries the new ideas,
afterwards called Christian, had been fermenting in the minds
of thoughtful pagans. The spirit of the age called for their
crystallisation in a leader and the call of the West again received
its answer from the East. But just as Naaman, a believer in the God
of Israel, was yet permitted to bow down in the house of Rimmon--or
as the theory and practice of modern Socialism are time after time
directly contrary--so, save for martyrs and enthusiasts--the Tolstoys
of their age--the general public accepted Christianity as filling up
awkward gaps in their earlier beliefs rather than as superseding them
altogether.

Roman witchcraft--continually reinforced from the Orient--grew in
importance as faith in the greater gods decreased. Frowned upon by
the police, as being contrary to public order, it was thus liable
to be confounded with Christianity--which was forbidden on similar
grounds--both alike being practised in secret and penalised if brought
too prominently into public notice. Christianity, as being the more
aggressive, was more severely repressed--and was accordingly destined
to more success. And it was reserved for the successful Christian to
prove upon his former companions in misfortune the utter uselessness of
persecution. Just as we may thank the pagan persecutor that we now live
in the Christian era, so the mediæval--and modern--witch owed much of
her existence to the persevering efforts of the early Christian towards
the suppression of witchcraft and the witch. It was natural--and
indeed praiseworthy--that the prominent features of paganism should
be relegated to the realms of darkness by the successors to the pagan
empire--the god of one religion inevitably becomes the devil of its
supplanter. But whereas it was easy enough to lump together satyr,
faun, centaur and siren, as varieties of demon, the witch was on a
different footing. She really existed, for one thing--in so far as that
she was of flesh and blood at any rate--and she exercised more personal
functions than any number of divinities. Everyone was ready to acclaim
reforms which did not interfere with his own comfort--and the witch
was a fireside necessity. She was family doctor, lawyer, and spiritual
director--and payer-off of your old scores to boot--a factor in your
life the loss of which could be compensated by no amount of religion.
Also she stood for tradition, "the good old times," the respectability
of unchanging conservatism. Christianity--novel and iconoclastic--might
make head among the inconstant townsfolk, always ready for some new
thing; the provinces, the village, the lonely farmhouse or the fishing
hamlet clung tenaciously to what had been good enough for their
grandfathers--as, indeed, they have been doing ever since.

Nevertheless, from the great cities the creed of Christ spread slowly
to the villages--suffering many modifications before it reached them.
Delivered straight from the lips of a Church father, Christian doctrine
might be rigid and direct enough. Passed from mouth to mouth, ignorant,
or understanding, they might reach the distant flock so diluted as
to have opportunity for compromise with time-honoured precedent--and
what more so than witchcraft. You might--if you were an open-minded
husbandman--conceive that you had been mistaken in seeing fauns
dancing where the sunlight glinted down through tossing leaves, or
in hearing the voices of nymphs in the chattering of a brook; but a
witch--whom you could see, touch, hear, who had cured your toothache
and revenged you on your dishonest neighbour--she took a great deal of
explaining away. Wicked she might be, getting her power from unholy
compact with the Evil One--burn, slay, persecute her by all means--if
it would please Heaven--but to disbelieve in her altogether, that
were asking too much of a plain man. How, indeed, could you expect it
of him when the very Emperors proved by their edicts the openness of
their minds. A Marcus Aurelius not only studied magic, but persecuted
Christians--slaying, among others, the venerable Polycarp. An Augustus
might feel called upon to take police measures against witches; an
Aurelian rebuked the Senate for not consulting the Sibylline books when
the barbarians threatened the gates of Rome. "One might imagine," he
said, "that we were assembled in a Christian church, rather than in the
temple of all the gods." Where an Elagabalus renewed old superstitions
and introduced yet others, a Constantine executed his favourite for
seeking to influence the weather.

The personal predilections of the Emperors did but reflect the many
and involved influences at work during the first four centuries after
Christ. Apart from the enduring influx of Eastern practices and
superstitions, Neo-Platonism was responsible for the revival of belief
in the supernatural as apart from the divine. The Alexandrian school,
discarding the old systems of philosophy, converted its study into
that of magic. The barbarians, again, were everywhere astir. The long
warrings between Rome and the Germans culminated in the 9th year of the
new era when the German Herman by his great victory over Varus brought
about the eventual liberation of his country. In 259 A.D. the Emperor
Gallienus married a barbarian princess and before the close of the
third century A.D. the Empire had become largely "barbarised" by the
Goths and Vandals who did it military service, and who, incidentally,
served to bolster up paganism and to introduce new features into it.
The Teutonic witch met her Roman sister, and introduced her to darker,
grimmer, and more vigorous conceptions of her art. The dreadful
pestilence which, in the third century, ravaged the Empire gave a new
popularity to the black arts, and the Roman witch was never more sought
after than in the years preceding the last and most violent persecution
of the Christians at the hands of Diocletian.

Persecuted or petted, the witch was never able to progress in the good
opinion of the Christian, whose protest against her existence was
steady and constant whatever his own fate or condition. As soon as the
last of his own persecutors had laid aside the sword, he at once seized
it and set to harassing the witch with a deserving vigour which has
never altogether relaxed.

Whereas the pagan had chastised the witch with rods for injuring man,
the Christian set about her with scorpions as an enemy of God. Nor was
the exalted testimony of the Fathers lacking to inspire his energies.
Tertullian, in the second century, declared the world to be over-run
with evil spirits, including among them all heathen gods, whether
amiable or the reverse, from Hebe to Hecate. Origen, in his third
book on Job, mentions that enchantments are sometimes of the devil.
Saint Augustine, in "De Civitate Dei," has no doubt that demons and
evil spirits have connection with women. The earliest ecclesiastical
decree bearing on the subject is that of Ancyra, in 315 A.D., by which
soothsayers are condemned to five years' penance. In 525 the Council
of Auxerre prohibited all resort to soothsayers. Witchcraft, which
thus took upon its shoulders all the enormities of paganism, attained
an importance it had never before possessed. The plain man began to
realise that his family witch was a more important person than he
had hitherto believed. If not herself of semi-infernal birth, he had
it on Saint Augustine's authority, as aforesaid, that she was in all
probability the mistress of a sylvan, faun, or other variety of devil,
and that her offspring were themselves no less diabolical. Naturally
enough they increased and multiplied, so that between corporeal and
spiritual devils the world was over-populated. The Messalians, indeed,
went so far as to make spitting a religious exercise--in the hope
of casting out the devils inhaled at every breath; and the common
superstition concerning sneezing has the same origin. It might almost
be said, indeed, that in those early days devils filled, and to
admiration, the part now played by the microbe in every-day life.

It is to be feared that, except by those who seriously studied the
question, the existence of so many devils of one kind or another did
not cause such general uneasiness as the clergy might desire--very much
as now happens when the medical world is appalled by the discovery of
some new microbe in strawberry, telephone receiver, or shirt-cuff. The
plain man accepted them, and having after some centuries discovered
that they made little practical difference to his life, ceased to
feel more than a languid interest in even the most appalling new
varieties discovered by saintly specialists. Their constant insistence
upon the inherent wickedness of humanity and the almost insuperable
dangers which assail the Christian on all sides lost something of
their freshness in time, one may suppose, and were succeeded by a
certain weariness. Granted that Christianity was the one sure road to
salvation in the next world, it was so difficult to follow without
stumbling that few, if any, could hope to arrive at the goal, save by
some such lucky accident as a martyrdom. Christianity was thus bound,
in practice, if not in theory, to come to some working agreement
with the old, comfortable pagan customs it had superseded. Certain
of the more popular pagan customs and festivals found their way into
Christian observance, certain popular deities were baptised and became
Christian saints. A familiar instance of this occurs in the case of
Saint Walpurg. In Christian hagiology she occurs as a virgin saint, and
as having accompanied Saint Boniface upon his missionary travels--all
of which would seem to show that pious scandal-mongering was less
rife in contemporary religious circles than is the case to-day. In
folk-lore we find many wells and springs associated with her and thus
acquiring valuable medicinal qualities. The oil exuded from her bones
upon Walpurgis-nacht was valued as relieving the pangs of toothache
and of childbirth. Potent in the cure of hydrophobia, the dog is
included among her pictorial attributes, while she is also represented
as bearing in her hand either oil or ears of corn--the symbols of
agricultural fertility. The festivals and rejoicings which took place
upon Walpurgis-nacht, with their special connection with witchcraft,
would further seem to show that Walpurg before she became a Christian
saint had a long history as a mother-goddess. In the same manner in the
cult of the Virgin may be found traces of that worship of Diana which
for 600 years persisted side by side with Christianity, and is far from
being altogether extinct in Italy even to-day.

As may readily be understood, these paganising tendencies were not
favourably regarded by the fathers. In the year 600 A.D. St. Eligius
felt called upon to forbid dancing, capering, carols, and diabolical
songs upon the festival of Saint John. A statute of Saint Boniface
forbids choruses of laymen and maidens to sing and feast in the
churches. As the Church increased in power, many such practices--as,
for example, the dancing of women round sacred trees and wells, with
torches or candles in their hands, the common meal, the choral song
and sacrifice--were roundly forbidden as witchcraft, the uprooting of
which the Church at last felt capable of taking seriously in hand. This
was indeed become a matter almost of life and death, for the Church
found itself in many ways in acute competition with the witch, the one
attaining by lawful means similar results to those achieved by the
other through the assistance of Satan. And just as Adam, upon learning
that the apple was forbidden to him, immediately hungered after it to
the exclusion of all other fare, so the public showed itself more
eager to obtain the forbidden services of the witch than those of the
legitimate practitioner. So much was this the case that the Church was
sometimes forced to resort to other means than persecution to show
itself capable of competing against the witch with her own weapons.
Occasionally, it must be confessed, these methods suggested rather the
American Trust magnate than the fair competitor, as, for instance,
the case of the Blocksberg. This hill was a place of considerable
importance to witches, providing a large choice of magical herbs as the
raw material for their trade in weather-charms. These could, however,
be gathered only upon the eve of Saint John and during the ringing of
the neighbouring church-bells. The ecclesiastical authorities, becoming
aware of this, gave orders that the bells should be rung only for the
shortest possible period on that date--a proceeding the unfairness of
which could only have been exceeded by not ringing the bells at all.

Another story of the kind, quoted by Mr. Lecky, shows that, even in
fair and open competition, holy water could hold its own against the
most powerful of black magic. A certain Christian, Italicus by name,
was addicted to horse-racing at Gaza. One of his most dangerous and
constant competitors was a pagan Duumvir. This latter, being versed
in the black arts, therewith "doped" his horses so successfully that
he invariably won. Italicus, being prohibited from following his
example, at last appealed to Saint Hilarion, exhorting him to uphold
the honour of the Church by some signal display of supernatural power.
The saint, after some hesitation, complied, and presented Italicus with
a bowl of specially consecrated holy-water. At the start of the next
race Italicus liberally besprinkled his team, whereupon they drew his
chariot to the winning-post with supernatural rapidity. The Duumvir's
horses, on the other hand, faltered and staggered, as though belaboured
by an unseen hand--and, needless to say, lost the race. Whether the
Duumvir appealed to the contemporary Jockey Club to disqualify the
winning team, and, if so, with what result, we are not informed.

Considering the vast and ever-increasing population of witches
and demons, it seemed an almost hopeless task to exterminate them
altogether. Nor indeed was it until after the thirteenth century that
the Church attempted the task on any universal scale. If an individual
witch was unlucky enough to fall into priestly hands, her fate was
likely to be unhappy--but in the early days of the faith the priest
felt himself capable of triumphing over her by less material weapons.
Only, as priests could not be everywhere, and the number of witches
so largely exceeded their own, means were provided whereby even the
layman might withstand them. Thus burning sulphur was very efficacious
in the driving out of devils, the subtlety (!) of its odour having
great power of purification. The gall of a black dog put in perfume was
another acknowledged recipe, as was the smearing of his blood upon the
walls of the infested house.

It is noteworthy, and a fact that vouches strongly for the sincerity
of the early Church, that although she thus practised what was nothing
less than sanctified witchcraft, she never attempted one of the most
frequent and popular of witch-practices--the foretelling of the future,
so far, at any rate, as this world was concerned. It is true that the
Christian's earthly future, being but an uncomfortable preliminary to
posthumous joys, might be more happily left unforetold. Yet many of
them did not altogether despise the pleasures of this life, and were
very willing to pay for an anticipatory glimpse of any likely to be
encountered.

Familiarity in some measure breeding contempt, the public in these
early days thus regarded neither witch nor dæmon with the dread and
hatred so manifest in the fifteenth century and onwards. For one
thing, faith in the power of the Church was more implicit. To dally
with the forbidden had all the fascination of a sport with a spice
of danger in it, when you knew that at any time a power vastly
greater than those of evil was ready to step in to protect you from
the consequences of your over-rashness. Before the name of a fairly
efficient saint the most powerful demon must bend his head, especially
with holy water anywhere in the neighbourhood. If you fell under the
power of a witch it could only be through neglecting to take proper
precautions or to employ someone else to do so for a moderate fee. Our
own Anglo-Saxon forefathers showed a very nice spirit of prudence in
such matters--as in the famous meeting between Ethelbert King of Kent
and Saint Augustine, held, by royal command, in the open air, lest the
missionary, being under a roof, might practise unlawful arts upon the
King. The witch, in a word, was everywhere, but so were the necessary
antidotes--some of them of the simplest. Thus, in the story of Hereward
we learn how the Wise Woman of Brandon, near Ely, anathematised the
hero from a wooden scaffolding. To be really efficacious her curses
must be thrice repeated, but before she had time to do this the
scaffold was set on fire by Hereward's followers, and the Wise Woman
perished miserably. The witch, in fact, like her gossip the Devil,
always comes off second best in folk-lore where she is matched against
the truly virtuous--a comforting reflection for everybody, however
ominous for their friends.

She was still to some extent a shadowy personality, of shifting and
indefinite attributes. Although in 696 the Council of Berkhampstead
decreed that any person sacrificing to the Devil should be punished--a
clear enough reference to witches--it was not until some centuries
later that the conception of the witch definitely crystallised into
its modern form of a woman carrying out an actual compact with Satan,
working miracles by his power, and frequently transported through the
air to pay him homage at Sabbath gatherings. Until then the Church may
be said to have been obtaining and sifting evidence, building up a
formidable mass of precedent and tradition, to be employed with deadly
effect when witchcraft was definitely branded as heresy.

Whether or no the sins of witch and sorcerer be definitely codified, it
is the duty of the law-giver to provide for all contingencies; and just
as Justinian devoted part of his code to dealing with witchcraft, so
Charlemagne, two centuries and a half later, enacted new and stringent
laws for the abatement of sorcery--as in the Capitular of 789, wherein
supernatural meteorology is forbidden. More direct, though perhaps less
efficacious, were such deterrent methods as those of the pious Bishop
Barbatus, who in the seventh century cut down and uprooted a certain
nut-tree famous as a meeting place for witches. It may here be noted
that trees were at all times much favoured by the evil sisterhood, more
especially as meteorological offices. Numerous witch-oaks throughout
Germany served for this purpose--one, at Buckenhofen, was used as a
swing by witches attending the Walpurgis-nacht. It is something of a
paradox that while a grove of oaks--the sacred tree of the Teutons, as
is the linden of the Slavs--is a protection against magic, particular
trees should be famous as gathering-points for witches.

As the year 1000 approached, the generally optimistic outlook upon
things in general suffered a decline. Famine and pestilence grew
always more commonplace; the price of corn increased unprecedentedly;
starvation became the normal condition of millions throughout Europe;
cases occurred in which children were killed and devoured by their
famished parents; dead bodies were disinterred and used for food.
Old prophecies had placed the end of the world in the year 1000, and
to the miseries of hunger and disease were added those of universal
terror. The forward movement in the Church seemed to have died away,
and Christian fervour gave place to increased insistence on forms and
ceremonies, regarded by the commonalty as tiresome, if necessary,
duties. Small wonder that they sought for something which, instead of
the hopeless contemplation of inherent sin, should provide some ray of
present comfort. Here was the opportunity of the witch, the sorcerer,
and the alchemist--and here also began the bitterest contest between
priesthood and witchcraft. Hitherto the Church had been able to regard
such rivals, if not with tolerance, at least with contempt. Now it
had to fight against weapons forged in its own furnaces, appealing
to that abysmal ignorance ordained by the priest upon his flock. If
the monopoly in knowledge be power, its application is double-edged;
the Church was forced to seek some new means of inspiring the fear of
celestial wrath to come into those who could imagine no circumstances
more dreadful than what they already daily endured. The time had come
to prove that those who tampered with the forbidden must expect a
double share of punishment--in this world as well as the next--and
that the earthly penalty was quite as much to be dreaded as the best
infernal efforts.

In 1025, Burckhard of Worms inserts the significant question in the
confessional:--"Have you believed that there are women who can turn
love into hate and hatred into love, or who can harm their neighbours
and seize their goods for themselves? Have you believed that godless
women blinded by the Devil ride abroad at night with the demon Holda,
obeying her as goddess?" Followed in due course Ethelred's decree of
banishment against witches, soothsayers, and magicians, and that of
Canute, which included love-witchcraft as a branch of heathendom.

Though the anathemas of the Church might for a time stem the increasing
tide of witch-popularity, they were fundamentally only incentives
towards a cult which did not include anathemas or persecution--except,
indeed, those within the control of the humblest individual. In the
twelfth century, moreover--the century of the Crusaders--many new
influences were at work. To counteract the general lethargy into which
the Church was sinking, the Popes availed themselves of their knowledge
of human nature. Epidemical frenzy was aroused by remission of penance,
absolution of all sins, past, present, and to come, and the assurance
of eternal felicity for all who took the cross. Sham miracles and
prophecies stimulated the popular enthusiasm, and more potent than
either was the knowledge among millions that any change they might
experience must be for the better. But however promising at the time,
the great "revival" was fraught with danger to the Church that provoked
it. New conditions evolved new ideas. Asia provided greater luxury for
body and mind than any hitherto known to its European invaders. The new
world thus opened before them might be sinful; it was at least very
pleasant. Future damnation presents few terrors to the well-fed, and
the discovery that millions existed, and in comfort, who had never
taken off their hat to a priest in their lives--however shocking it
might seem at first--was bound to give furiously to think.

Among the forbidden institutions upon which the Crusader found reason
to reconsider his ideas, witchcraft took a prominent place. Anathema
though it might be, it had a multitude of Oriental exponents, who,
whatever they might have to look for in the next world, had little
cause to complain of this. Such abominations cried for intelligent
investigation, if only that they might be refuted, with the result
that the Crusader returned home with the knowledge of many novel
features that might be profitably added to the Western ritual of magic.
Meanwhile in his absence his own native practitioners had not been
idle. Faithful wives were anxious to know something of their lords'
whereabouts, safety, or, it may be, fidelity. Those who were not
faithful had even more need of tidings as to his probable return and of
means for delaying it. In such emergencies the services of the witch
were indispensable--and priestly prohibitions only served to advertise
her powers and to increase the number of her suppliants. These various
causes, and more particularly the last, combined to give witchcraft an
importance in social life hitherto denied to it, and to draw down upon
it more and more the wrath of Mother Church. She had, indeed, other no
less pressing calls upon her attention. The long slumber of orthodoxy
was at an end; many heresies disturbed the minds of the faithful. The
revival of Latin literature stirred thoughts and feelings long blurred
by Church teaching. The Crusaders were not the sole importers of
Oriental ideas; Greek traders also, along with the drugs and perfumes
of the East, brought new doctrines, received with dangerous tolerance.
The vigorous Innocent III. quickly perceived the danger, and entered
upon a systematic persecution of heretics. In 1208 a Papal Legate
having been murdered by Raimond of Toulouse--against whom the Church
had already serious cause of complaint, Innocent at once proclaimed
a crusade, and the heretical Albigenses were involved in the ruin
of their most powerful protector, suffering a persecution of almost
unprecedented severity. The establishment of the Inquisition now became
a logical necessity if the spread of heresy was to be saved, and little
time was lost in its creation.

By this time Satan had assumed a definite form and personality in the
public mind, and the idea that the witch obtained her powers through
a compact with him, long sedulously inculcated, had taken root. It is
true that even yet the "Sabbath" was but a harmless servile carnival,
frowned upon, indeed, and discouraged wherever possible. Coincidentally
with the rise of the general heresy hunt, Europe was over-run by a
number of devastating epidemics. Leprosy, epilepsy, and every form
of skin disease raged almost unchecked. They were attributed to many
causes, from lack of faith to the consumption of various Eastern
drugs introduced by home-faring Crusaders--though lack of food and
cleanliness were doubtless the most active agents in spreading them
abroad. Dirt had long been accounted almost a mark of holiness--and
one so easy of attainment that few cared to disregard it and arouse
suspicion as to their orthodoxy by too frequent ablutions. Medical
science was at its lowest ebb; the priests, with keen common sense,
declared skin eruptions to be divinely-inflicted punishments, and
therefore not amenable to holy water. In despair the unhappy sufferers
turned to the witch for aid, who, by her knowledge of herbs and
simples, was qualified to alleviate, if not to cure. Everything seemed
to conspire in thrusting forward the witch into dangerous prominence.

The ecclesiastical measures of repression grew always more severe.
Canon Law decreed that soothsayers be subjected to excommunication,
and enjoined upon the bishops to leave no stone unturned for their
repression. By the fourteenth century the Sabbaths, under the
penetrating eye of the Inquisition lost their harmless character and
became forcing grounds of the Black Mass. The practice of medicine by
women, however beneficial, grew more and more into disfavour, and year
by year the attributes of the witch grew more infernal as the material
Devil became more and more familiar in men's minds. No doubt the
increase of witches was real as well as theoretical. Love of notoriety
is of no modern growth--and the reputation of possessing infernal
powers satisfactorily filled the position of the modern newspaper
paragraph. This in more senses than one--for not only could you obtain
notoriety for yourself, as does the modern Apache who murders for the
_réclame_ it will bring him, you could also satisfy a grudge against
a neighbour, with no risk to yourself, by anonymously accusing her to
the local clergy. Witchcraft, again, was open to all, without licence,
examination, or entrance fee. Poverty, the desire of solitude, a nice
taste in invective, and a black cat or so were all the stock-in-trade
required to start in business.

The convenience, from the Church point of view, of catching witch and
heretic in the same net was too obvious to be disregarded. By the
fourteenth century their connection was well established in the eyes
of church and law. In France, so early as the thirteenth century,
prosecution took place for "vauderie," an omnibus-word which covered at
once witchcraft and the heretical practices of those Vaudois from whose
name it was derived. In Ireland, in 1324, proceedings for witchcraft
taken against Dame Alice Kyteler and others in the Court of the Bishop
of Ossory, brought about a conflict between Church and State, such
cases, according to English law, being tried by a secular tribunal.

The substitution of linen for wool in dress was an efficient factor
in abating the ravages of skin-diseases, but their place was taken
by the more terrible Black Death, and, in 1350, epileptic dancings,
known as the Dance of Saint Guy, broke out with especial virulence in
Germany and Flanders. These and other diseases, constant wars, bad
harvests, and other troubles brought about a series of class-wars,
the Jacquerie in France, and Wat Tyler's insurrection in England, for
example; the Devil and the witch between them shared the blame in the
eyes of respectable Europe. The greater pestilences were attributed to
the Devil's personal intervention, while minor diseases, and especially
poisonings, fell to the witch's share--this latter accusation being,
perhaps, not altogether without cause. The public--or that portion
whose lives were cast in places sufficiently pleasant to prevent them
desiring such consolation as magic might afford them--were now fully
aroused to their iniquity. Against the agents of so grisly a horror
as the mediæval devil no measures could be too severe, no torture
too dreadful. Scholasticism vied with the Church in deploring the
increasing evil; John XXII.'s publication of the first Bull against
witchcraft was capped by the University of Paris, which, in 1398,
laid down rules for the judicial prosecution of witches, expressing at
the same time regret that the crime of sorcery should be growing more
common than in any former age. In England, from the Conquest onwards,
commissions were issued from time to time empowering the Bishops to
seek out sorcerers. In 1406 such a mission was delegated to the Bishop
of Lincoln. It was not, however, until 1542 that penalties more severe
than fine and imprisonment were inflicted by the Ecclesiastical Courts.

The ever-increasing prestige of witchcraft in time raised it to a point
where it could be made an apt weapon for political intrigues. The
burning of Jeanne d'Arc as a witch is a case in point, her tormentors
by their choice of indictment dimming for long centuries the halo
which surrounded her efforts towards the freeing of her country, while
at the same time it provided ample opportunity for those who, having
been among the first to hail the rising popular star, are also first
to enjoy his fall from greatness. Another case, even more definitely
political, was that of Eleanor Duchess of Gloucester, in which the
charge of witchcraft proved a serviceable weapon in the hands of
Cardinal Beaufort. The Duchess, although accused of no less a crime
than procuring a wax image of Henry VI., manufactured by the Witch of
Eye, with nefarious intent, escaped the death penalty indeed, but was
condemned to public penance, followed by life-long banishment.

As the Reformation grew nearer, public opinion veered round to some
slight extent in the direction of leniency. The Inquisition was itself
becoming so unpopular that its victims were bound to excite some secret
sympathy. The Renaissance, throwing wide the door to all the intellect
of classical days, already shook the dominion of the Church to its
foundations. The time had come for desperate measures if Orthodoxy was
to hold her own. In 1484 the Witch-Bull of Innocent VIII. definitely
handed the witch over to the care of the Inquisitors--and thus gave
the signal for a series of persecutions of unexampled horror, enduring
through more than two centuries, and the last echoes of which have
scarcely died away even to-day.




CHAPTER X

THE WITCH-BULL AND ITS EFFECTS


I have elsewhere in this volume attempted to show that, even in our
own days, there is nothing particularly incredible about a witch--and
that the disrespect into which she has fallen is due rather to our
modern lack of any sense of proportion in our beliefs, than to any
fault of her own. Certainly we have no cause to pride ourselves on
any intellectual superiority to the great divines and scholars of
past ages who devoted themselves to the dissection or condemnation
of witchcraft--rather we should deplore our lack of faith and of
imagination. For them there existed no possibility of doubt, no
relative standard of fact or theory. The premises were absolute.
The spiritual world was based upon the word of God as expressed in
the Bible and translated by the Church. To argue the absurdity or
inadmissibility of any particular tenet of Christian doctrine was to
suppose a paradox--the fallibility of the infallible. Eminent jurists,
as was Bodin, or learned physicians such as Wierus, both writing
towards the close of the sixteenth century, arguing with great mental
dexterity on opposite sides, alike accepted the initial axiom, cramp
and confine them though it might. They had, indeed, no alternative--as
well might two modern astronomers in disputing over the whereabouts
of an undiscovered planet deny the existence of the sun. The humane
Wierus, a friend of Sir Philip Sidney, by the way, preaches from the
same text as does the judicial Bodin--though he delivers a different
sermon. Bodin, supporter of the old conventions, makes a formidable
onslaught on Wierus--not for any scepticism as to the existence of
witches--no ground was given him for such an accusation--but for
maintaining against the view of the Church that witches were victims
rather than disciples of the Devil. Nor, in the face of the very
explicit injunction, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live"--and the
suggestion was still to be mooted that "witch" in the original stood
for "poisoner"--can we accuse those who obeyed it of having acted from
any other motives than those of earnest Christians. It is true that
they carried zeal to the point of enthusiasm--but zeal has always been
accounted a mark of grace.

As we have seen the severest period of witch-persecution commences from
their definite classification as heretics by the Bull of Innocent VIII.
issued in 1484. The Bull itself was not lacking in directness:--"It
has come to our ears," it commences, "that great numbers of both sexes
are not afraid to abuse their own bodies with devils that serve to both
sexes. And with their Inchantments, charms and sorceries to vex and
afflict Man and Beast with inward and outward pains and tortures....
Therefore with the authority apostolic we have given power to the
Inquisitor ... to convict, imprison and punish."

The Inquisitor, Sprenger, lost little time in making use of
this delegated authority--and such was his zeal and so many his
opportunities of acquiring knowledge that within two years after the
issue of the Bull he gave to the world his famous "Witch's Hammer,"
for the direction and guidance of those upon whom should fall the duty
of exterminating so vile a heresy. This "Malleus Maleficarum" contains
minute accounts of every description of witch, with suggestions for
counteracting and exterminating their influence. Like most of his
predecessors--and successors--Sprenger blames the whole existence of
witchcraft upon the notorious frailty of women. The very word "fœmina,"
he declares, in the accents of authority, is derived from "fe" and
"minus"--because women have less faith than have men. From this
unhappy constitution of the sex countless ills have sprung--among them
innumerable varieties of witch. Of these, thirteen are exhaustively
described, that all may recognise them. Worst are those who slay and
devour children. Others raise hail, tempests, lightning and thunder,
procure barrenness in man, woman and beast, make horses kick until
they throw their riders, or pass from place to place through the air,
invisible. Others can render themselves taciturn and insensible under
torture, can find things hidden or lost, foretell the future and
alter men's minds to inordinate love or hate. They can draw down the
moon, destroy unborn children, raise spirits--in a word, there is no
department of devilry, major or minor, in which they are not adepts, if
we may trust their enthusiastic historian, whose work at once became
an authority--almost a ready reckoner of witchcraft, by which anyone
with a knowledge of Latin had at his fingers' ends the best possible
method of recognising, convicting and destroying any variety or variant
whatsoever.

It is pleasant to reflect that so careful and conscientious a work
earned for its author the affection and admiration alike of his
contemporaries and of posterity. Later writers based their theories
and arguments upon his discoveries as upon a firm rock, while during
his lifetime he directed public opinion upon the evil he had set
himself to combat so successfully that not one old woman in fifty
could be sure of dying in her bed for generations. It is a pregnant
sign of the genuine horror in which witches were held that all the
ordinary legal conventions were suspended at these trials. Contrary
to the usual procedure, witness might be borne against them by
excommunicated persons, convicts, infants, dishonest servants and
runaways. Presumption and conjecture were accepted as evidence, an
equivocal or doubtful answer was regarded as a confession and rumour
or common report sufficient to ensure a conviction. It is true that
such improvements in legal procedure cannot be altogether attributed
to the exertions of the Inquisitor--dating, as many of them do, from
centuries before the publication of his magnum opus--at least he
devoted a splendid enthusiasm to the object he had set before him, and
on his death-bed was able to look forward with confident humility to
the reward merited by a well-spent life.

The effects of the Witch-Bull were immediate and in every way
satisfactory to its authors--a perfect frenzy of witch-finding
resulting. Forty-one women were burned in one year--commencing in
1485--by the Inquisitor Cumanus. A colleague, not to be outdone,
executed a hundred in Piedmont--and was perfectly willing to continue
the good work, had not public enthusiasm waned in view of the
inevitable monotony in this form of amusement. A little later a tempest
devastated the country around Constance. The inhabitants recognising
that--in face of the recent Bull--it were blasphemous to attribute such
a storm to natural causes, seized two old women, obtained confessions
in the usual way, and burned them. About 1515, some five hundred
persons were executed in Geneva as "Protestant witches"--an instance
of the alliance between heresy and witchcraft. In Lorraine the learned
and enthusiastic Inquisitor Remigius put to death nine hundred persons
in 15 years. Hutchinson, indeed, writing in 1718, puts the number
at eighteen hundred, but even the smaller--and more correct--total
shows that Remigius did his duty nobly. Italy, naturally enough, was
determined not to be outdone by foreign holocausts, and accordingly we
find that more than a thousand executions took place in Como in 1524,
and an average of more than a hundred was maintained for several years.

Mere lists of figures such as these are apt to pall, especially when,
as in such a case, it is almost impossible for a modern reader to
realise their actual meaning, as that every day throughout a whole
year, three unhappy women, old, poor, and defenceless, should be
inhumanly tortured, and afterwards publicly murdered in the most
painful way imaginable in one district, not only without a word of
protest being raised, but with the approval of all Europe. That it
should have actually taken place vouches for the earnestness with which
our forefathers regarded their religion, if for nothing else.

Nor is it to be supposed that Protestants were in any way less
attentive to this branch of their religious duties than were their
Catholic neighbours. They might differ upon every other point--on
this at least there was no room for disagreement. Martin Luther,
with his usual decision, makes his attitude perfectly clear, "I have
no compassion on these witches. I would burn them all." Perhaps one
reason for this uncompromising attitude may have been his contempt
for Satan's snares, of which he had considerable experience. So
accustomed did he grow to the assaults of the Devil that, having been
once, as it is related, awakened at dead of night by an alarming
clatter, "he perceived that it was only the Devil and so went to
sleep again." Calvin, again, says of Psalm v., 6, "If there were no
charms of sorcery, this were but a childish and absurd thing which
is here written." It is true that Protestant and Catholic regarded
the witchcraft question from diametrically opposite standpoints.
Whereas the Roman Church regarded heretics as a variety of witch,
the Reformers were inclined to regard Catholic rites and forms as
among the most virulent of the black arts. At a somewhat later date,
during the New England persecutions, a girl was deposed to have been
allowed, by the Devil, to read "Popish Books"--such as "Cambridge and
Oxford Tracts"--while good Protestant works, as "The Bible Assemblies'
Catechism" or Colton's "Milk for Babes" sent her, being in the power
of the Devil, into violent convulsions!

However enduring might be the enthusiasm of the judges, the commonalty
in time grew sated with the spectacle of their own and their friends'
aunts and grandmothers being burned to ashes for the glory of God.
Witch-trials and witch-burnings, however dramatically exciting, were
lacking in variety--and were expensive as well as entertaining. While
the energy of the Inquisitors was stimulated by the forfeiture--in
their favour--of the witch's worldly goods--the community had to lose
them, such as they were, besides suffering complete disorganisation of
daily business routine. There were even those--difficult of belief as
it may seem--who so far risked their chance of Paradise as to sicken at
the continuance of such useless bloodshed and to grow sceptical as to
the singlemindedness of its promoters. Such a one was the humane and
learned Dr. Wierus, who, in 1563, published at Basel his famous volume,
"De Præstigiis." At the time, indeed, this plea for the witch as the
victim rather than the ally of Satan, served only to fan the flame of
persecution, by the bitter controversy to which it gave rise, though
subsequently quenching it in no small degree. Although, needless to
say, a firm believer in the reality of the black art, Wierus branded
it as the direct rather than the indirect work of the Devil. As
helpless victims, therefore, his agents should not be punished for
crimes in which their human frailty was alone guilty. He adopted, in
a word, towards the witch, the modern attitude towards the dangerous
lunatic--that she should be restrained rather than punished. He even
displays a certain contempt for her powers--understanding, in the light
of his own medical knowledge, that many so-called cases of bewitchment
or demoniacal possession, were the result of purely natural causes.
Like his contemporaries, Wierus concludes that the Devil chooses women
rather than men to do his will as being easier to influence. Naturally
malicious and impatient, they are unable to control their affections
and are all too credulous--qualities of which Satan takes every
advantage. Particularly does he appreciate stupid, weak old women,
the shakiness of whose wits places them the more surely in his power.
Wierus parts company from his contemporaries in urging that this very
frailty should arouse compassion--that they should be pitied rather
than treated as stubborn heretics--and that if punished they should be
treated less severely than were men, because of this infirmity of their
sex.

Not content with stirring up doubt as to the spiritual nature of
witchcraft, Wierus has the audacity to question the motives of some
of its judges. He quotes an example of the profitable side of the
witch-mania as having happened in Wurtemburg. The skins of animals
that died by mischance there became the property of the executioner.
This functionary evidently possessed a spirit far in advance of his
age, for coincidently with the rise of a local witch-mania, a fatal
epidemic--attributed, of course, to witchcraft--broke out among the
sheep, pigs, and oxen of the neighbourhood. The executioner grew
rich--and had not the wisdom to conceal it. The jealous suspicions of
his neighbours were aroused, he was put to the torture, confessed to
having poisoned the animals, and was condemned to be torn to pieces
with pincers.

Wierus had studied the natural history of the witch no less closely
than his predecessor, the Inquisitor Sprenger. Indeed, judging from
some of the charges brought against them at contemporary trials,
we may agree with him that they were more suited to the attentions
of a physician than of a judge. Thus, among the commonest of their
crimes--as frequently proved by their own confession, it is to be
remembered--were the dishonouring of the crucifix and the denial
of salvation, the absconding, despite bolts and bars, to attend
the Devil's Sabbath and the partaking in choral dances around the
witch-tree of rendezvous. Remigius tells us that many confessed to
having changed themselves into cats, to having belaboured running
water with rods in order to bring about bad weather--more particularly
hail-storms--and other doings of the kind customary to witches of
all the ages. Wierus, who was held to be a disciple of that prince of
sorcerers, Cornelius Agrippa, was naturally as expert in all things
relating to the Devil and his kingdom as to his earthly slaves. No
modern revivalist could exceed the minuteness of his knowledge, nor,
indeed, the thoroughness expressed in his detailing of it. He even
seems to have taken a census of the more official population in
the under-world, enumerating seventy-two princes of evil, who rule
over seven million four hundred and five thousand nine hundred and
twenty-six devils of inferior rank.

Fifteen years after the publication of "De Præstigiis," appeared
Jean Bodin's counterblast. The eminent jurist was well qualified to
speak, having done some persecuting on his own account and thus gained
first-hand experience of the ways and customs of the witch. To him
the theories of Wierus appeared as those either of a very ignorant
or of a very wicked man. The suggestion that witches and sorcerers
should be pitied rather than punished appeared to him to aim a blow
at the very framework of society, human and divine, and he felt it
his duty to refute Wierus and all his works, "not through hatred, but
primarily for the honour of God." He also gives detailed accounts of
the various kinds of witches, but unlike Wierus discreetly refrains
from setting down the spells and invocations to the Devil with which
he is acquainted, lest, falling into the hands of the evilly disposed,
improper use be made of them. For such crimes as those habitually
committed by witches he can find no penalty severe enough, while as to
Wierus' plea that allowance be made for the weakness of women he quotes
approvingly the law, that "the punishment for witchcraft shall not be
diminished for women as is the case in all other crimes."

England was in no way singular from the rest of Europe in her method
of approaching the question, though her persecutions were on a smaller
scale. The Act of 1541 whereby various kinds of sorcery, such as the
destruction of a neighbour's goods or person, the making of images or
pictures of men, women, children, angels, devils, beasts and fowls
for magical purposes, were declared felony without benefit of clergy,
was repealed in the reign of Edward VI. Another, distinguishing the
various grades of witchcraft, was passed in 1562. By it, conjurations,
invocations of evil spirits, the practice of sorceries, enchantments,
charms and witchcrafts whereby deaths resulted were declared felony,
without benefit of clergy, and punishable with death. If only
bodily harm ensued, the penalty for the first offence was a year's
imprisonment and exposure in the pillory, and for the second, death.
Notwithstanding such laws, the highest in the land were not averse
to personal dealings with followers of the black art. Queen Elizabeth
herself so far exercised her royal prerogative as to have been--unless
rumour lie--on excellent terms with Dr. John Dee, the eminent
crystal-gazer, whose "black stone" is now in the British Museum. In
Scotland the principal Act was passed in 1563. By it the practice of
witchcraft, sorcery and necromancy, the pretence of possessing magical
knowledge, and the seeking of help from witches were declared capital
offences.

It says much for the common sense of the English nation that it should,
at such a period, have produced so enlightened a writer on the subject
as was Reginald Scot. As against his contemporary, Holland, who,
writing in 1590, urges that since witches were in the Bible, "shall
Satan be less cruel now?", Scot, in "The Discoverie of Witchcraft,"
scoffs at "Sprenger's fables and Bodin's bables"--a conceit that must
have afforded him infinite satisfaction. "I denie not," he argues,
"that there are witches or images, but I detest the idolatrous opinions
conceived of them." And again: "I am well assured that if all the old
women in the world were witches, and all the priests conjurers, we
should not have a drop of rain the more or the less for them." The
suggestion of priests as conjurers is, of course, a hit at "Papish
practices," and another description of witches as "Papists" betrays
his religious attitude. It must be said that the Anglican Church was
inclined towards tolerance--the severe witch-persecutions in these
islands, which I detail elsewhere, being chiefly due to that Puritan
spirit which dwelt with more satisfaction on the sins than the virtues
of mankind. For just as it has been said that the only antagonist more
redoubtable on the battle-field than a swearing Irishman is a praying
Scotsman, so the Puritan was a deadlier persecutor of witches than the
most zealous Inquisitor. This with good reason, if we remember that
the Catholic offered the chance of Heaven to anyone who was not an
obstinate heretic; while the Puritan was of much the same opinion as
the old Scotswoman, who, having with her brother seceded from the local
kirk, and being asked by the minister whether she seriously believed
that no one but her brother and herself would be saved, replied that
she had grave doubts about her brother.

James I., although upon his succession to the English throne he found
the Episcopacy well suited to his theories of kingship, yet preserved
the Puritanical sense of other people's sinfulness in his heart. To
this no less than to his desire for literary laurels, is to be ascribed
his painstaking--not to say pedantic--"Dæmonologia," published in
1597, which the loyal Hutchinson excuses in his "Historical Essay on
Witchcraft"--excuses on the ground of his youth and inexperience.
James, needless to say, saw no need of apology for the benefit he was
conferring on mankind in general and his subjects in particular. In his
love for police-court details, indeed, he showed himself altogether
at one with his subjects, if we may judge from the taste of their
present-day descendants. He had, again, every right to consider himself
an authority on his subject, as one who had himself suffered from
magical machinations. A Protestant King seeking a Protestant bride, he
suffered all the terrors and discomforts of a temptuous crossing from
Denmark, brought about through his earthly agents by Satan, filled with
wrath and consternation at the alliance of two such powerful enemies
of his kingdom. As he might have expected, his plans were brought to
nought, and his servants, Agnes Simpson and Dr. Fian, suffered the
appropriate penalty, the last-named especially being subjected to
perhaps the most sickening torture on record. King James showed so
close an interest in the minutiæ of the black art that had he moved in
a less exalted sphere he might well have come under suspicion himself.
Thus on one occasion he sent for Grellis Duncan, a performer on the
Jews' harp, and caused her to play before him the identical tune to
which Satan and his companions led the brawl at a Sabbath in North
Berwick churchyard. It is true, as against this, that many witches
executed in his reign quoted infernal pronouncements that the King was
"_un homme de Dieu_" and Satan's greatest enemy--a form of homage which
so whetted the Royal ardour that few juries ventured, with the fear of
his displeasure before them, to acquit any of their unhappy victims.

In the "Dæmonologia" James shows every sign of keen enjoyment. He
writes after the manner of the most eminent--and tedious--divines,
dividing his matter into firstlies, secondlies, and thirdlies--divisions
and sub-divisions, headings and sub-headings, with royal prodigality.
He is fearfully and wonderfully theological--and occasionally indulges
in touches of elephantine lightness such as might well have given pause
to the most obstinate sorcerer. His preface, eminently characteristic
of the whole, opens thus:--"The feareful abounding at this time in this
countrie of these detestable slaves of the Divil, the witches or
enchaunters, hath moved me (beloved reader) to dispatch in post this
following Treatise of mine, not in any wise (as I protest) to serve for
a shewe of my learning and ingine, but only (moved of conscience) to
preasse thereby, so farre as I can, to resolve the doubting heart of
manie; both that such assaults of Sathan are most certainly practised,
and that the instruments thereof merit most severely to be punished.... And
for to make this Treatise the more pleasant and facill, I have put it
in forme of a Dialogue"--an unwonted concession to the public taste, this
last, on the part of one who believed so firmly in the Divine Right of
Kings.

In common with most dogmatists on the subject, James declares that the
great majority of witches are women, woman being the frailer vessel,
and therefore, like Eve, more easily entrapped by the Devil than
those of his own sex. He recapitulates many of their commonly-quoted
misdeeds, and relates how Satan teaches them "to make pictures by
wax or clay," which, being roasted, utterly destroy the person they
represent. To some he gives powders such as cure certain diseases,
to others poisons, and so on and so forth. For the practice of such
infernal arts the English Solon declares that witches and magicians
should be put to death without distinction of sex, age, or rank.

Such august patronage of their efforts served the ever-increasing tribe
of professional witch-finders in good stead, and the Act of 1563 was
enforced more stringently than ever. The trials were sometimes held
in the ordinary courts, more often before special tribunals, set up,
as a rule, on the petition of a presbytery or of the Grand Assembly.
For the greater convenience and protection of the public, boxes were
placed in many churches to receive anonymous accusations, giving
magnificent opportunity to slanderers and backbiters. To such a pitch
had matters come by 1661 that Parliament directed the judges to visit
Dalkeith and Musselburgh, two notorious centres of the art magical,
twice a week to try those accused. In these trials any evidence was
relevant, especially if put forward by professional witch-finders or
witch-pinchers, while the ordinary methods of torture were aggravated
when confessions were sought for, in view of the Devil's penchant for
protecting his own.

The close of the sixteenth century saw the commencement of a series
of persecutions fiercer and more general than perhaps any which had
preceded them, which did not finally die out before the rising sun
of common-sense until almost our grandfathers' time, and which were
carried to almost greater extremes in the New World than in the Old.




CHAPTER XI

THE LATER PERSECUTIONS IN ENGLAND


The law--especially in this country--gains half its terrors from
its pomp and circumstance. An English prisoner, condemned to death
by a wigless judge, might well regard himself as murdered--and few
Englishmen that have attended an American court of law but have felt
scandalised by its lack of ceremonious decency, even if they have
accepted its decrees as just. Indeed, it is scarcely too much to hold
that the firm belief in the corruptibility of the American judge and
the one-sidedness of American justice, which every Englishman cherishes
as his birthright, was originally based upon his distaste for this lack
of appropriate ceremonial.

If this judicial dignity be needed even for the trial of an ordinary
fellow mortal, how much more must it be needed when Satan himself and
his human agents are at the bar. Accordingly, we find the inquisitor or
judge always ultra-punctilious in bringing all due form and ceremony
to bear upon a witch-trial. No detail was without its special
significance, no circumstance too trivial for august consideration,
the more so that from its very nature a witch-trial could not exactly
follow ordinary procedure. The power of Satan--in the seventeenth
century at any rate--was more than a match even for the trained legal
intellect, and special precautions were necessary to provide for the
safety of the judge and the conviction of the witch. So exhaustive
were these precautions, indeed, that we can find no trace that any
judge in England or elsewhere was ever injured by the assaults of the
Devil, when in court, while but very few witches, once put on trial,
succeeded in escaping conviction--the accusation being, to all intents
and purposes, tantamount to a verdict of guilty.

A host of precautionary measures to be taken by the judge when the
witch was brought into court, have been recorded. On no account must
he allow her to touch him, especially, as Reginald Scot has it, "upon
his bare." He must wear about his neck "conjured salt, palms, herbes,
and halowed waxe." The prisoner must approach the judge backwards--just
as she approaches Satan's throne at the Sabbath, by the way--and he
must make the sign of the cross frequently the while. As we have seen,
any evidence, even of those debarred from testifying in ordinary
cases, might be given against a witch. This, of course, provided an
excellent opportunity for the dishonest servant, who, having stolen
his mistress' property and with it levanted, need only accuse her of
witchcraft to escape any unpleasant consequences to himself. It was,
however, the only means by which the law could escape from the horns
of a serious dilemma--as none that are honest can detect a witch.
Again, she must be denied any chance of proving her innocence--or the
Devil will certainly take full advantage of it on her behalf, and once
arrested, she must on no account be allowed to leave the prison or go
home. Popular suspicion, presumption, and conjecture are sufficient to
ensure a conviction, for in such a case Vox populi is emphatically Vox
Dei. Confession must, however, be extorted at all costs. As the great
Inquisitor, Sprenger, from whose authoritative pronouncements I have
already quoted freely, has it: "If she confess nothing she must be
dismissed according to the law; therefore every care must be taken to
ensure confession."

Before burning the witch, it was, however, necessary to catch her.
Here--and more particularly in England--private enterprise stepped in
to supplement public effort. Witch-finding offered a respectable and
lucrative career for anyone gifted with the requisite imagination,
and provided a safe opening for those who had failed in other walks
of life. Enterprise, imagination, the form of facile expression, the
instinct of sensationalism, and so forth--were all necessary for the
finished witch-finder, it is true. The names of many have come down to
us, but none more fully earned the prophetic title of the Napoleon of
witch-finding than Matthew Hopkins, who alone gained, by his eminent
services to the public, a "handle to his name"--that of "Witch-Finder
General." Hopkins, who flourished in the mid-seventeenth century,
gauged the public taste in witch-sensation to a nicety--and elevated
his trade to an exact science. Yet curiously enough, he only entered it
by accident, owing to an epidemic of witchcraft in his native town of
Manningtree. His public spirit leading him to take a prominent part in
the discovery and punishment of the culprits, it became plainly evident
in which direction his talents could be best employed, and what had
been a hobby became his life-work. His position having been legalised,
he adopted the manner of a judge, taking regular circuits through the
four counties which he more particularly took under his protection, or
giving his services to any towns applying for them at the extremely
modest charge of twenty shillings and expenses. More than a hundred
witches were brought to punishment by his painstaking exertions,
though perhaps his greatest triumph was achieved in the case of the
Reverend Mr. Lewis, the "reading" parson of Framlingham. Mr. Lewis
was a churchman, and as such regarded as a malignant by the Puritan
Government, and, needless to say, by Mr. Hopkins, himself a Puritan of
the most orthodox type. Mr. Lewis, being eighty-five years of age, was
tortured after Mr. Hopkins' recipe, and was so brought to confess that
he had made a compact with Satan, that he kept two imps, and that he
had sunk several ships by his magic arts. He was duly hanged, though it
is satisfactory to know that at his death he withdrew the confession
his human weakness had extorted from him and died with a dignity
becoming his age and cloth.

As was only to be expected in this imperfect world, Mr. Hopkins'
just severity and proper disregard for sickly sentimentality brought
him many enemies, some of whom no doubt were inspired by envy of his
professional success. Although cheered by the understanding sympathy
of the superior class, including among them no less a person than
Sir Matthew Hale, Lord Chief Justice of England, he was continually
attacked, both publicly and privately, by people who ought to have
known better. One of the most virulent of these was one Mr. Gaule,
minister of Great Stoughton, in Huntingdon, who not only wrote and
preached against Hopkins and his methods, but refused him permission
to conduct a witch-hunt at Stoughton. Stung to the heart by such
ingratitude, Mr. Hopkins set forth his side of the argument in a
letter which Mr. Gaule himself subsequently gave to the world. It is
sufficiently characteristic to bear re-quotation:

"My Service to your Worship presented. I have this day received a
letter not to come to a Toune called Great Stoughton, to search for
evil-disposed persons, called Witches (though I heare your Minister
is farre against us through Ignorance:) I intend to come the sooner
to heare his singular Judgment in the Behalfe of such Parties; I have
known a Minister in Suffolk preach as much against this Discovery in a
Pulpit, and forced to recant it by the Committee in the same Place. I
much marvaile such evil Members should have any, much more any of the
Clergy, who should daily preach Terrour to convince such Offenders,
stand up to take their Parts, against such as are complainants for
the King and Sufferers themselves, with their Families and Estates. I
intend to give your Toune a visit suddenly. I am to come to Kimbolton
this Weeke, and it shall be tenne to one, but I will come to your Toune
first, but I would certainly know afore whether your Toune affords
many sticklers for such Cattell, or willing to give and afford as
good Welcome and Entertainment as other where I have beene, else I
shall wave your Shire (not as yet beginning in any Part of it myself)
and betake me to such Places, where I doe, and may, persist without
Controle, but with Thanks and Recompense. So I humbly take my leave and
rest. Your Servant to be Commanded, Matthew Hopkins."

Mr. Gaule, however ill-advised, proved himself no despicable
antagonist. He turned the batteries of ridicule against the worthy
witch-finder, and his methods, which he describes as follows: "Having
taken the suspected Witch, she is placed in the middle of a room upon a
stool or table, cross-legged or in some other uneasy Posture, to which
if she submits not she is then bound with cords; there she is watched
and kept without Meat or Sleep for the space of Four and Twenty Hours
(for they say within that time they shall see her Imp come and suck).
A little Hole is likewise made in the door, for her Imp to come in
at--lest it should come in some less discernible shape. They that watch
her are taught to be ever and anon sweeping the Room, and if they see
any Spiders or Flies, to kill them, and if they cannot kill them, then
they may be sure they are her Imps."

But however earnest in their errors might be Mr. Gaule and those who
supported him, it was long ere they could find many supporters in their
crusade against one who had so struck the public imagination. Hopkins'
methods of torture might be severe, but they produced results--such as
the following:--One Penitent Woman confessed that her mother, lying
sick, and she looking at her, somewhat like a Mole ran into the bed to
her, which she being startled at, her mother bade her not fear it, but
gave it her, saying, "Keep this in a Pot by the fire and thou shalt
never want." And so on and so forth.

In the end, however, as too often happens, envy triumphed over modest
merit, and Hopkins had to pay the penalty that usually awaits the
popular idol. Either his severity outran his discretion, or he showed
too openly his belief that the chief object of a profession is to
provide a handsome income; or perhaps his inventive faculties did not
keep pace with the public desire. Be that as it may, his fall, when it
came, was heavy. It is even said, on reputable authority, that Hopkins
was himself, at the last, accused of witchcraft, that he was tried by
one of his own methods, that of "swimming," and that like many of the
old women he had tried, he "swam," was accordingly found guilty, and
executed. It may be agreed that, like the story of Phalaris destroyed
in the fiery bronze bull of his own devising, or of Dr. Guillotin,
first to suffer on the guillotine he had invented, this end of Hopkins
has too much of poetic justice about it to be altogether credible. But
in all that has to do with witchcraft, faith is a matter of opinion, so
there we may leave it.

That Matthew Hopkins initiated new methods of witch-finding by no
means implies that there was any lack of such before his time. Where
the simple rule-of-thumb torture failed to extract the requisite
confession, a further range, subtler and more exquisite, came into
play. No witch could say the Lord's Prayer--a possible enough
contingency under great nervous strain even for a good Christian. Thus
Fairfax relates how Thorp's wife, accused of bewitching his children,
being put to this test, could not say "Forgive us our trespasses," and
thus convinced the justices of her guilt. Another method much practised
by Hopkins was the searching for the Devil-marks. These marks, as
we have said, were the corporeal proofs of her contract with Satan,
borne by every witch upon some part of her body, and were further the
places whereat her imps came to suck her blood. Few witches--which is
to say, suspects--were ever found to pass this test satisfactorily--a
fact the less surprising in that any blemish, birth-mark, or even
insect-bite was accepted by special legal injunction as sufficient
evidence. The witch-mark was believed to be insensible to pain, whence
arose the popular and lucrative profession of "witch-pricking." The
witch-pricker, having blindfolded the witch, proceeded to prick her in
suspected places with a three-inch pin, afterwards telling her to point
out to him the places where she felt pain. If the suspect, half-crazed
with shame and terror, was unable to do so with sufficient exactitude,
the spot was declared insensible, and her conviction followed. Before
the actual pricking, when the witch had been stripped of her clothes,
she was shaven, lest she should have concealed in her hair some charm
against confession under torture. Great care was taken at the same time
lest the Devil, by sucking blood from her little finger or left foot,
should make it impossible for her to confess. Further, as a witch was
notoriously unable to shed tears, another test of her guilt was to
call upon her to weep to order--very much as Miss Haversham in "Great
Expectations" commanded Little Pip, "Now, play!"

Most popular test of all, as taking place in the open and thus
providing a general holiday, was witch-ducking or "swimming." So near
was it to the great heart of the British public that its celebration
continued informally well into the nineteenth century. In Monmouth, so
late as 1829, several persons were tried for the ducking of a supposed
witch; while in 1857 the Vicar of East Thorpe, in Essex--perhaps the
most noted witch-stronghold in England--was compelled to mount guard
in person over the door of a suspected witch to prevent her from
undergoing a similar fate. The procedure was of the simplest. The
thumbs and great toes of the suspect were tied across, and she was
thus dragged in a sheet to a pond or stream. If she floated, she was
pronounced a witch; if she sank, she was in all probability drowned.
Even if by a lucky chance she escaped both these perils, the nervous
shock--to say nothing of what was probably the first cold bath she had
ever experienced--acting upon her advanced age, gave her little chance
of final triumph over her accusers. Another well-known and popular test
was that of weighing the suspected witch against the Church Bible.
Had the authorities provided one of more than common weight which
outweighed her skin and bone, woe betide her! for her guilt was proved
beyond further question.

Such forms of extraneous evidence were, however, held in less store
than was the obtaining of a definite confession, which had the double
advantage of justifying the judges to the full as well as of convicting
the accused. Of how it might be obtained Reginald Scot gives us a vivid
example. "The seven words of the Cross," he says, "be hanged about the
witch's neck and the length of Christ in wax be knit about her bare
bodie with relikes of saints." If torture and other means of persuasion
cannot obtain a confession, the jailer must pretend to leave her, and
some of her friends must visit her, promising that if she will but
confess they will help her to escape from prison. Friday, according to
the same writer, was the most auspicious day for the purpose. As to
the actual torture, the prisoner must first be stripped lest the means
of witchcraft be sewn into her clothing, the instruments of torture
being so placed that she has an uninterrupted view of them. The judge
then exhorts her that if she remains obstinate, he bids the attendants
make her fast to the strapado or other chosen instrument. Having
been tortured, she is taken aside and again urged to confess by the
promise of thus escaping the death-penalty. As the Church conveniently
absolved the faithful from the necessity of keeping faith with heretics
or sorcerers, this promise was never kept. To put it briefly, every
possible avenue of escape was denied the accused. Even an alibi,
however complete, was unavailing, seeing that in her absence her place
was always filled by a demon.

However much we may sympathise with the victims of such judicial
proceedings, it would be less than fair to blame the general public for
its attitude towards them when such men as Blackstone or Sir Matthew
Hale were convinced of their reasonableness. Blackstone, indeed, one
of the greatest of English lawyers, went so far as to declare that "to
deny the possibility, nay, the actual existence of witchcraft is at
once flatly to contradict the revealed Word of God." The attitude of
Sir Matthew Hale, Lord Chief Justice, an enlightened and God-fearing
man, may best be gathered from an account of one of the trials in which
he was concerned. In 1664, at St. Edmundsbury, two women, Amy Duny
and Rose Cullender, were tried before him upon the usual charges. The
first witness was Dorothy Durent, whose child was under the care of
Rose Cullender. Dorothy had for some time suspected Rose of bewitching
her child--a fact which throws some doubt upon the witness's maternal
care in confiding her offspring to such a nurse. Eventually the witness
consulted a witch-doctor, a proceeding which, had she known it,
rendered her liable to conviction as well as Rose, under the statute
of James I.[1] The doctor advised her to hang up her child's blanket
in the chimney, which she did. On taking it down some time later, she
was horror-stricken to find a toad in it. This toad she had "put it
into the fire and held it there, though it made a great and horrible
noise, and flashed like gunpowder and went off like a pistol, and then
became invisible, and that by this the prisoner was scorched and burnt
lamentably." Other witnesses, Mr. Pacy and Edmund Durent, deposed
that Rose Cullender and Amy Duny came to them to buy herrings, and,
on being refused, went away grumbling. Further, it appeared that Amy
Duny had told Cornelius Sandwell's wife that if she did not fetch her
geese home, they would be destroyed. She also told Cornelius that if
he did not attend to a rickety chimney in his house it would fall.
John Soan deposed that he had three carts wherein to carry corn. One
of them "wrenched Amy Duny's house, whereat she scolded him. That very
day his cart overturned two or three times, and his children had fits."
Probably such damning evidence would have sufficed by itself. It was
driven home by that of Sir Thomas Browne, who declared with dangerous
moderation that "the fits were natural, but heightened by the Devil
co-operating with the malice of the Witches, at whose Instance he did
the villainies." This was too much for the Lord Chief Justice. He "was
in such fears and proceeded with such caution that he would not so much
as sum up the evidence, but left it to the Jury, with prayers that the
great God of Heaven would direct their hearts in this weighty manner."
Needless to say, the jury returned a sentence of "Guilty." Amy Duny
and Rose Cullender were hanged at Cambridge accordingly, obstinately
refusing to confess, and no sooner were they dead than the afflicted
children were cured of their fits and returned to the best of health.
Which can have left no further doubt in the mind of Sir Matthew Hale,
Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, as to the justice of his
sentence, even had he any before.

It would be both tedious and unprofitable to trace out the whole
long history of witch-persecution in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Their details are invariably nauseous, and differ only in
the slightest degree; having heard one, the recapitulation of the
rest can be of interest only to the moralist. Some of the more famous
examples may be briefly considered, however, as typical of the rest. I
have already referred to the case of the Knaresborough witches, accused
of bewitching the children of Edward Fairfax, the scholar--a case the
more remarkable that the six women accused, although tried before two
successive assizes, were finally acquitted. The lonely moorlands and
grim wastes of the Northern counties were, naturally enough, regarded
with suspicion as offering very eligible lurking-places for Satan's
agents, and accordingly we find that the majority of the earlier
persecutions concerned that part of the county. Ten years before
the Knaresborough trial--in 1612--twenty witches were tried "at the
Assizes and Generall Gaole-Delivery, holden at Lancaster, before Sir
Edward Bromley and Sir James Eltham." They came from Pendle Forest, a
wild district on the eastern extremity of the county, and the most
prominent among them was Elizabeth Southernes, more generally known
as Mother Demdyke, who, by her own confession, had been a practising
witch for nearly half a century, having been led astray thereto by one
Tibb, a spirit or devil in the form of a boy wearing a parti-coloured
coat of brown-and-black, whom she met upon the highway. She and
her fellow-prisoners were charged with murders, conspiracies, and
other damnable practices, upon evidence fully borne out by their own
confessions. Nevertheless, of the twenty only twelve were hanged,
one, Mother Demdyke herself, cheating the gallows by dying in prison,
while the remaining seven were acquitted--for the time. That so large
a proportion should have escaped speaks ill for the abilities of the
prosecution, for an example was badly needed. "This remote country,"
says Scot, "was full of Popish recusants, travelling priests, and so
forth, and some of their spells are given in which holy names and
things alluded to form a strange contrast with the purpose to which
they were applied to secure a good brewing of ale, or the like." One
such charm, quoted at the trial, was used by Anne Whittle, _alias_
Chattox, one of the twenty, in order to remove a curse previously laid
upon John Moore's wife's brewing, and ran as follows:--

 Three Biters hast thou bitten,
   The Host, ill Eye, ill Tongue;
 Three Bitter shall be thy boote,
   Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost,
   A God's name.
 Five Paternosters, five Avies,
   And a creede,
 For worship of five woundes
   Of our Lord.

Which would seem to show that whether or no Anne Whittle was a witch,
she was certainly a Papist, so we need feel little surprise that she
was among the twelve executed.

The second great persecution in Lancashire, in 1633, rested almost
entirely on the evidence of a boy of eleven. His name was Edmund
Robinson, and he lived with his father, a very poor man, in Pendle
Forest, where no doubt he heard many legends of the redoubtable Mother
Demdyke and her colleagues. Upon All Saints' Day, when gathering
"bulloes" in a field, he there saw two greyhounds, one black, the other
brown, each wearing a collar shining like gold. They fawned upon him,
whereafter, "seeing no one, he took them, thinking to course with them.
And presently a Hare did rise very near before him. Whereat he cried,
'Loo, Loo, Loo'; but the Doggs would not run. Whereupon he, being very
angry, took them, and with the strings that were about their collars,
tied them to a little bush at the next hedge, and with a switch that
he had in his hand he beat them. And instead of the black greyhound,
one Dickenson's wife stood up, a Neighbour, whom this Informer
knoweth. And instead of the brown one a little Boy, whom this Informer
knoweth not." Dickenson's wife offered him a shilling as the price of
his silence, but he answered, "Nay, thou art a witch." Whereupon she
put her hand into her pocket and pulled out something like a Bridle,
"that gingled," and put it over the little Boy's head, upon which
he turned into a white horse. Mrs. Dickenson then seized upon the
Informer, set him before her on the white horse, and carried him to a
new house called Hoarstones, about a quarter of a mile away. Here he
saw about sixty persons, some by the door, others riding towards the
house on horses of different colours. In the house was a fire with meat
roasting before it. A young woman offered him "Flesh and Bread upon
a Trencher and Drink in a Glass," but after the first taste he would
have no more of it. On going into the adjoining Barn, he there saw six
persons kneeling and pulling at Ropes fastened to the top of the Barn.
Whereupon "there came into the Informer's sight flesh smoking, butter
in lumps, and milk as it were syling (streaming) from the said Ropes.
All of which fell into basins placed under the said Ropes. And when
these six had done, there came other six which did likewise, and during
all the time of their said pulling they made such ugly faces as scared
the Informer, so that he was glad to run out and steal homewards."
They pursued him, but he met two horsemen, whereupon they left him. The
foremost of his pursuers was one Loind's wife.

The troubles of the Informer were not yet at an end. "After he had
come from the company aforesaid, his Father bade him go and fetch
home two kine and he happed upon a Boy, who fought him." The Informer
had his ears and face made very bloody in the fight, and looking
down he saw the Boy had a cloven foot. With commendable prudence he
ran away, only to see a light like to a lantern, which he pursued,
thinking it might be carried by a neighbour. But he only found a
woman--Loind's wife--standing on a bridge, and running from her he met
the cloven-footed Boy again, who hit him and made him cry.

Such was the dread story told in court, and partly corroborated by
the boy's father. The wives of Dickenson and Loind, along with some
eighteen other persons, were arrested at once, while the informer and
his father made a comfortable little sum of money by going the round of
the neighbouring churches and there detecting others. The trial took
place at Lancaster Assizes, when seventeen of the accused were found
guilty, but the judge, not being satisfied with the evidence, obtained
a reprieve. Four of the accused were sent up to London, and committed
to the Fleet Prison, where "great sums of money were gotten by shewing
them." The Bishop of Chester held a special examination of the case,
and the informer, being separated from his father, soon confessed that
his estimable parent had invented the whole story as a means towards an
end. So the trial ended in a lamentable fiasco, from the point of view
of that public who were looking forward to the public executions as a
holiday.

Although the activities of Matthew Hopkins reached their culminating
point in the trial of the Manningtree Witches, held before Sir Matthew
Hale at Ipswich in 1645, they were only a part of his bag in that year,
as we may gather from a statement in Beaumont's "Treatise on Spirits,"
that "thirty-six were arraigned at the same time before Judge Coniers,
an. 1645, and fourteen of them hanged and a hundred more detained in
several prisons in Suffolk and Essex." Nearly twenty years later,
in 1664, we find the Witchfinder-General at work in Great Yarmouth,
where he accused sixteen old women, all of whom were convicted and
executed; and in the same year took place the St. Edmunsbury trials
already referred to. Nevertheless it must be said for Matthew Hopkins,
gent., that by the very enthusiasm he imparted into his business he
did something towards checking the tide of persecution even at the
full. Although the general public gave little sign of satiety, those
in authority and the more educated class in general were growing tired
of so much useless bloodshed. Witch-trials continued unabated, but
towards the close of the century the judge's directions to his jury
were frequently such as to ensure an acquittal; while, even when found
guilty, the accused were often reprieved through the judge's exertions.
Among these just judges the name of Lord Chief Justice Holt merits a
high place, as of one more than usually in advance of his age.

In 1694, before the same Lord Chief Justice, at Bury Saint Edmunds,
was tried Mother Munnings, of Hartis, in Suffolk. Many things were
deposed concerning her spoiling of wort and harming of cattle, and,
further, that several persons upon their death-beds had attributed
their destruction to her arts. Thus it was sworn that Thomas Pannel,
the landlord, not knowing how to turn her out of his house, took away
the door and left her without one. Some time after, he happening to
pass by, she said to him, "Go thy way; thy nose shall lie upward
in the churchyard before Saturday next." On the Monday following
Pannel sickened, died on the Tuesday, and was buried within the week,
according to her word. To confirm this, another witness added that a
doctor, being consulted about another afflicted person, and Mother
Munnings being mentioned, said that she was a dangerous woman, for she
could touch the line of life. In the indictment she was charged with
having an imp like a polecat, and one witness swore that coming from
the alehouse about nine o'clock at night, he looked through her window,
and saw her take two imps out of a basket, a black and a white. It was
further deposed that one Sarah Wager, after a quarrel with the accused,
was struck dumb and lame, and was in that condition at home at the time
of the trial. Many other equally dreadful accusations were brought, and
things might have gone hard for Mother Munnings had not the Lord Chief
Justice been on the bench. He, however, directed the jury to bring in
a verdict of "Not Guilty," which they obediently did. "Upon particular
Enquiry," says Hutchinson, "of several in or near the Town, I find
most are satisfied it was a very right Judgment. She lived about Two
years after without doing any known Harm to any, and died declaring her
Innocence. Her landlord was a consumptive spent Man, and the Words not
exactly as they swore them, and the whole thing seventeen Years before
... the White Imp is believed to have been a Lock of Wool taken out of
her Basket to spin, and its Shadow, it is supposed, was the Black one."

In the same year Margaret Elmore was tried at the Ipswich Assizes
before the same judge. "She was committed," says Hutchinson, "upon
the account of one Mrs. Rudge, who was Three Years in a languishing
condition, as was thought by the Witchcraft of the Prisoner then at the
Bar, because Mr. Rudge, Husband of the afflicted Person, had refused
letting her a House. Some Witnesses said that Mrs. Rudge was better
upon the confinement of the woman, and worse again when her chains were
off. Other witnesses gave account that her grandmother and her aunt had
formerly been hanged for Witches, and that her Grandmother had said
she had 8 or 9 Imps, and that she had given two or three apiece to her
children." It was further shown on the evidence of a midwife who had
searched her grandmother, that the prisoner had plainer witch-marks
than she; while several women who had been on bad terms with her
took oath that their bodies were infested with lice and other vermin
supposed to be of her sending. But not even the vermin could influence
the Lord Chief Justice, and Margaret Elmore was found "Not Guilty."

Yet another case, tried before Holt, was that of Elizabeth Horner at
Exeter, in 1696. Three children of one William Borch were said to have
been bewitched by her. One had died, the leg of another was twisted,
all had vomited pins, been bitten, pricked, and pinched. Their mother
deposed "that one of them walked up a smooth plaistered Wall till her
Feet were nine foot high, her Head standing off from it. This," she
said, "she did five or six times, and laughed and said Bess Horner held
her up." Poor Elizabeth had a wart on her shoulder, which the children
said was a witch-mark, and was sucked by her toad. But the Lord
Chief Justice seems to have been of another opinion, for he directed
the jury to acquit her. Indeed, of all the many cases of witchcraft
brought before him, not one prisoner was convicted--a state of things
which would certainly have resulted in a question being asked in
Parliament had it happened in our time. The last woman found guilty of
witchcraft in this country was Jane Wenham, the Witch of Walkerne, in
Hertfordshire, who was tried in 1712. The witch-finder was called into
requisition, and she was submitted to the usual inane and degrading
tests. "They either did themselves or suffered others that were about
them to scratch and tear her face and run Pins into her Flesh. They
... turned the Lord's Prayer into a Charm"--(the Vicar of Ardely was
responsible for this part of the performance, by the way). "They turned
to Spectre Evidence, they drave her to such Distraction that by leading
Questions they drew from her what they called a Confession. They had
her to Jail. The witnesses swore to vomiting Pins. The Jury found her
Guilty, the Judge condemned her, and those clergymen wrote a Narrative
of the Tryal, which was received and read with such Pleasure that in a
Month's Time it had a Fourth Edition." But Jane Wenham was fortunate in
her judge. Being a man of learning and experience, "he Valued not those
Tricks and Tryals, and though he was forced to condemn her because
a Silly Jury would find her guilty, he saved her Life. And that she
might not afterwards be torn to pieces in an ignorant Town, a sensible
Gentleman, who will for ever be in Honour for what he did, Colonel
Plummer of Gilston, in the same County, took her into his protection
and placed her in a little house near his own, where she now lives
soberly and inoffensively, and keeps her church, and the whole county
is now fully convinced that she was innocent, and that the Maid that
was thought to be bewitched was an Idle Hussy ... and was well as soon
as her sweetheart came and married her."

Thenceforward the law of England had no more terrors for the witch,
though she was not yet quite out of danger. The Statute of James I. was
not repealed until 1736, and long after that the mob was accustomed
to take the law into its own hands. Thus, in 1751, a man and his wife
named Osborn were ducked at Thring, having been dragged by the mob
from the workhouse where they had been placed by the parish officers
for safety. The woman lost her life in the process. She was, however,
not unavenged, for a verdict of "Wilful Murder" was returned against
the ringleader of the mob, a chimney-sweeper named Colley, and he was
hanged, very much to his own and other people's indignation. There was
indeed something to be said for the injured Colley when a man like
Wesley, pinning his faith to the Bible, could find no means of evading
the direct command, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live." The last
case in which the blood of a witch was actually shed in this country,
so far as I have been able to trace, was in 1875, when a certain Ann
Turner, a reputed witch, was murdered by a man, who was, however,
declared insane.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: "If any person, or persons, shall use, practise, or
exercise any invocation or conjuration of any evil and wicked spirit,
or shall consult, covenant with, entertain, employ, find, or reward any
evil and wicked spirit, to or for any intent or purpose, or to take up
any dead man, woman, or child out of his, her, or their grave, or any
other place where the dead body resteth, or the skin, bone, or any part
of any dead person to be employed or used in any manner of witchcraft,
sorcery, charm or enchantment, or shall use, practise, or exercise any
witchcraft, enchantment, charm, or sorcery whereby any person shall
be killed, destroyed, wasted, consumed, pined, or lamed in his or her
body, or any part thereof, every such offender is a felon without
benefit of clergy." (This Act was not repealed until 1736.)]




CHAPTER XII

PERSECUTIONS IN SCOTLAND


The influence of longitude upon national tendencies in superstition is
far too wide a subject to be here discussed in any detail, but speaking
generally, it may be said that the superstitions of a people--as
their religion--are largely a matter of climate--milder and more
genial in temperate districts, carried to fiercer and more terrible
lengths amid extremes of heat and cold. The man whose gods are based
upon his conceptions of the thunderstorm, the grim northern winter
or the tropical sun, evokes sterner and more dreadful images than he
whose lot is cast amid mild skies and gentle breezes. How wide is the
difference between the grim gods who ruled the inhospitable heavens of
Scandinavian and Teuton from the tolerant Bohemians who tenanted the
classical Olympus. The gentle dryads and light-hearted fauns of Italy
would have perished in the first snows of a Baltic winter, just as the
hungry ravens of Woden would have been metamorphosed into Venus' doves
in one Italian generation.

Nowhere is the influence of climate upon national temperament more
clearly typified than in the island of Great Britain. The Viking,
settling amid the lush meadows and pleasant woodlands of England, laid
aside his heathen sacrifices for the more climatically appropriate
religion of Christ with scarcely a regret. Thor and Woden long held
their own in the bare northern fastnesses, not to be finally driven
out until they had tinged the Christianity which took their place with
something of their own hopelessness and gloom. Just as the gods of
Valhalla ever looked forward to the day of their destruction, so Hell
rather than Heaven has always held the leading place in the Scottish
imagination. So it came about that the superstitions of the Scot
were gloomier than were those of his neighbour over the Border. The
conviction of his own sinfulness was always with him; how much deeper
and more certain that of his neighbours. And because he had a more
imminent sense of sin, his belief in witches and their malignancy was
more intimate and more resentful. The Englishman, again, feared the
witch chiefly on his own personal account; the Scotsman took up the
cudgels on behalf of his Creator as well. The Devil seemed so much more
powerful to the dwellers of a bleak Highland glen than to the stout
yeoman walking amid his opulent English pastures. In Scotland he was on
terms almost of equality with God; it is scarcely too much to say that
to the majority he was even more powerful, and his earthly agents all
the more to be feared and hated.

As in Rome and Greece, the witch was firmly settled in Scotland
centuries before the coming of Christianity. But she was of another
breed, as befitted her sterner ancestry. She and her demoniacal
coadjutors held all the land under a grip of blood and iron. There was
nothing amiable, nothing whimsical, nothing human about the spirits,
of one kind or another, that lorded it among the mists and heather.
Even the fairies had more in common with Logi than with Oberon, Elfame,
their dwelling-place, resembled rather Hell than Fairyland. In place of
a Lob-lie-by-the-Fire, who found his highest pleasure in the helping
of good housewives without fee, of a Queen Mab, who tormented no one
but the idle or the wicked, you had a Kelpie, lurking in lonely places
intent upon your murder, or a Banshee, prophesying your coming death
or ruin. When at last Christianity came, it had a long, stern struggle
against such antagonists--nor, indeed, could it ever altogether
overcome them, even though it forced them to adopt new names and
new disguises. The missionary saints found their task of conversion
increased tenfold by the strenuous opposition of the witches and other
evil spirits. St. Patrick, in particular, so enraged them and their
master the Devil, by his pertinacity, that he was forced, for a time,
to flee before their assaults back to Ireland. One of their most famous
exploits was the bombardment with a mountain-top of the vessel in which
he was embarked. It is true that their aim, like that of Polyphemus,
a member of their own family, was bad, and the mountain-top fell into
the sea instead of drowning the saint. But by this very mischance they
provided permanent proof of their exploit; for the mountain-top remains
to this day to testify unto it, being that upon which Dumbarton Castle
was subsequently built.

Among the many legends dealing with these same early Scots witches,
I am tempted to quote from one, taken down verbatim from the lips of
an old Highland woman, by the late Dr. Norman Macleod and related
by him in his "Reminiscences of a Highland Parish." In its modern
form it was woven around the imaginary misadventures of a Spanish
Princess--and the real shipwreck of the _Florida_, one of the vessels
forming the Spanish Armada, sunk near Tobermory, in Mull, in 1588.
Actually, however, the magical passages have some much more ancient
history, probably, as we may judge from incidental reference to
Druidism, from pre-Christian days. The first part of the legend relates
how the Spanish Princess came to Mull, there had a love affair with
Maclean of Duart, and was murdered by his jealous wife. The King of
Spain, hearing of his daughter's fate, fitted out a war-vessel and
despatched it to Tobermory to take summary vengeance. Maclean and his
people, feeling unequal to resisting it by ordinary means, sought
aid from magic (Druidism, in fact) and by powerful spells and charms
gathered all the witches of Mull, the _Doideagan Muileach_, together.
He explained the position and begged them to raise a tempest and sink
the Spanish vessel, pointing out at the same time that her commander,
one Captain Forrest, was himself a magician. The chief witch asked
if the Spaniard, when declaring his unfriendly intentions, had said,
"With God's help!" On learning that he had omitted that precaution
she professed herself ready to undertake the task. This passage is so
unsuggestive of the pagan witch's usual attitude that I take it to be a
pious interpretation of later date.

In due time the witches began their work of _ṻbag_, _obag_ and
_gisreag_ (charm, incantation and chanting), but with little initial
effect. Stronger measures becoming necessary the chief witch tied a
straw rope to a quern-stone, passed it over a rafter, and raised the
stone as high as she was able. As it rose the wind rose with it, but
she could not get it very high owing to the counter-spells of the
Spanish captain with the English name. Accordingly she called her
sister-witches to help her--witches with very much finer names, by
the way, than their English colleagues could boast of. They were nine
in all, and the names of five were Luideag (which is to say "Raggie"),
Agus Doideag (or "Frizzle Hair"), Agus Corrag Nighin Jain Bhàin
("The Finger of White John's Daughter"), Cas a'mhogain Riabhaich á
Gleancomham ("Hogganfoot from Glencoe") and Agus Gormshuil mhòr bhàrr
na Maighe ("Great Blue-Eye from Moy"). All pulled together at the rope,
but could not raise the quern-stone. Some of them then flew through
the air and climbed about the ship's rigging in the shape of cats,
spitting and swearing. But Captain Forrest only laughed at them. So he
did when their number increased to fifteen. At last the _Doideag_ got a
very strong man, _Domhnull Dubh Làidir_, to hold the rope and prevent
the stone from slipping down again, while she flew off to Lochaber to
beg the assistance of Great Garmal of Moy, the _doyenne_ of Scotch
witchcraft, whose powers were more developed than those of all the
others put together. Garmal accepted the flattering invitation, and
set out for the scene of action. No sooner was she in the air than a
tempest began, and by the time she reached Tobermory Captain Forrest
realised that he had better retire. But before his cable could be cut
Great Garmal had reached the ship, had climbed to the top of the mast
in the shape of the largest black cat that ever was seen, and uttered
one spell, whereupon the Spanish man-o'-war with all her crew sank to
the bottom of the sea.

Against witches of such prowess he must be a powerful man--saint
or king--who would gainsay them. Many--if not most--of the earlier
Scottish kings had passages with witchcraft, mostly to their own
detriment. Leaving aside Macbeth, quite as credible an historic
character as the rest, we have King Duff, who, towards the end of the
tenth century, narrowly escaped a lingering death at the hands of the
witches--they employing the old-fashioned, even in those days, but
eminently dependable "waxen image." By good luck only he was enabled to
discover the witches and, having burned them and broken up the magic
before it was quite melted before their fire, to recover his usual
health and spirits.

Not only for its long line of eminent witches does Scotland claim an
important place in the annals of the arts magical. In Michael Scot
she had one of the most famous wizards known to history, far superior
in prowess to the great bulk of his successors, if tradition may be
credited, and every whit as eminent, while a great deal more probable,
than the British Merlin of Arthurian legend. Thomas the Rhymer, he of
Escildonne, chosen lover of the Fairy Queen, was another wizard of
repute.

It is an indirect testimony to the high, if evil, place held by magic
in Scotland that so many of its followers and practitioners were men
and women of the first ranks of life. We have the dread figure of
William, Lord Soulis, boiled to death as the only fit punishment for
the crimes committed in his feudal stronghold, such as put him on an
evil parity with the Marshal de Retz, the French Bluebeard. Or again,
in 1479, by which time we are on firm ground, the Earl of Mar, with a
whole band of male and female abettors of humbler rank, was burned in
Edinburgh for attempts on the King's life by aid of waxen images and
spells. Indeed, the whole family of this peccant nobleman proved, on
investigation, to be tarred with the same magical brush. Lady Glammis
again, burned in 1536 as a witch, was one of the proud Douglasses,
grand-daughter of Archibald Bell-the-Cat, widow of "Clean the Causeway"
Lord Glammis, whom, _inter alia_, she was accused of murdering--young,
beautiful, and wealthy. It is true that her death was very necessary
to one of the contemporary political parties, though that may have
been only a coincidence. Another aristocratic witch was Lady Katherine
Fouliss, who, with her step-son, was tried in 1590 for "witchcraft,
incantation, sorcery, and poisoning." She, although she seems to have
gone about her questionable business with an open-hearted publicity
that arouses our admiration, was acquitted through family influence,
and her step-son with her, though several of their humbler accomplices
paid the penalty in the usual way.

In the following year occurred a witch-trial of interest in itself,
and the cause of the great outburst of persecution which for the next
century makes the annals of Scottish justice run red with innocent
blood--that of Dr. Feane--or Fian, as it is variously spelt. The story
of the "Secretar and Register to the Devil" has been often told, but it
will bear recapitulation. Fian was a schoolmaster at Saltpans, Lothian;
he was further, according to his accusers, a wizard. More exactly,
perhaps, he should be described as a male-witch, seeing that he had no
control over Satan, but, on the other hand, had sworn allegiance to
him, received witch-marks--under his tongue--and otherwise conformed
to the etiquette of the lower grade in the profession. This seems,
indeed, to have been customary in Scotland, where the distinction which
I have endeavoured to lay down between the sorcerer and the witch is
often hard to trace. His magic, however, gains its chief interest from
its object--no less a person than James I. and VI. This learned and
Protestant monarch, being on his way to visit his Danish bride in her
native land, the Devil and his Secretary laid a plot to drown him. They
put to sea, after the vessel, along with a whole regiment of witches,
and there cast an enchanted cat into the sea, raising a fierce storm,
which could not, however, prevent the Divinely-protected James from
reaching Denmark in safety. On his return journey the plotters tried
another plan--to raise a fog whereby the Royal ship might be driven
ashore on the English coast. Towards this end Satan cast a football, or
its misty semblance, into the sea, and succeeded in raising what may
be accurately described as the Devil's own fog. But angels guided the
ship upon its proper course, and again the King escaped the assaults
of his enemies. For these and other crimes Dr. Fian, with a number of
women-witches, was tried, tortured, forced to confess, and burned on
Castle Hill--though he withdrew his confession before the end and died
like a gentleman and a scholar. It is an interesting point about the
trial that in it occurs the first Scottish mention of the Devil's mark.

The effects of this outrage upon the Lord's Anointed were not to end
with the death of its presumed concocters. If the tribe of witches had
grown so bold, it was high time they were extirpated, and gallantly
did the King and his advisers set about it. It was in 1563 that the
persecution of the witch was regularised as a distinct branch of crime
by an enactment of the Estates, "that nae person take upon hand to use
any manner of witchcrafts, sorcery, or necromancy, nor give themselves
furth to have ony sic craft or knowledge thereof therethrough abusing
the people," and that "nae person seek ony help, response, or
consultation, at any sic users or abusers of witchcrafts ... under pain
of death."

Thenceforward, until the last witch-burning in 1727, the fires were
seldom allowed to go out, and to be an old and ugly woman was perhaps
the most "dangerous trade" in Scottish industry. There was, indeed,
one incidental to a witch-burning which may--it is at least to be
hoped--have sometimes moved the economical Scotsman in the direction of
toleration--the expense. Here, for instance, are the items expended in
the execution of one batch of witches in Fife in 1633:--

                                         £  s. d.
 For ten loads of coal to burn them      3  6  8
 For a tar-barrel                          14  0
 For towes                                  6  0
 For harden to be jumps to them             3 10
 For making of them                            8
                                         --------

Or a grand total of £4 11s. 2d., no small sum, seen with thrifty eyes,
especially if we consider the greater value of money in those days.

It is, perhaps, only characteristic of the national attitude towards
the whole subject that the "White," or amiable, witch was held in as
great detestation as her "Black," or malignant, sister. Torture and
penalty were the same for either. Thus we find that, in 1597, four
women were convicted at Edinburgh for curing, or endeavouring to
cure, certain of their neighbours' ills by witchcraft, and were in
due course strangled and burned. It is true that they did not suffer
the greater penalty of being burned alive, which was reserved for
witches of unusual malevolence. The dislike and dread of a "White"
witch was not, be it noted, due to ingratitude alone, but rather
because it entailed the mutilation of the patient at the Resurrection.
While the rest of his body would owe its preservation in this world
to God Himself, any limb or organ healed by the Devil--acting through
the "White" witch--would belong to him, and thus be unable to rise
at the Day of Judgment with the rest. In endeavouring to understand
the mental attitude which gave rise to the great persecutions of
the seventeenth century, one cannot afford to overlook such points
of belief as this. Fear and the instinct of self-preservation, not
cruelty, were the driving-power in the witch-murderer. We, who think no
shame of shooting partridges for pastime, have little cause to contemn
the seventeenth-century Christian who killed witches lest they should
destroy him body and soul.

Such is the similarity of the various Scottish witch-trials that
too-detailed recapitulation would be tedious and unprofitable. Some,
however, stand out from the rest by reason of their grotesque horror
and exaggeration. Such is the trial of Isobel Grierson, "spous to
Johnne Bull, wark-man in the Pannis" (Preston Pans), tried at Edinburgh
in March, 1607. Grierson, by the way, was a name very prominent in
witch-circles at the time. One Robert Grierson had taken a leading
part as an accomplice of Dr. Fian, above referred to, his being the
hand which cast the enchanted cat into the sea in the endeavour to
drown King James. He was also, as shown in the confession of another
defendant in the same trial, the cause of much disturbance at a Sabbath
held in North Berwick Churchyard. Satan, by an unfortunate slip,
addressed him by his real name. As etiquette strictly demanded that
Christian names should be ignored, and nicknames--in this instance "Rab
the Rower"--used instead, the mistake appeared an intentional insult on
Satan's part, and was so taken by the assembled witches, who expressed
their displeasure with uncompromising vigour, even to the extent of
running "hirdy girdy" about the churchyard. But to return to John
Bull's wife. She was accused, _inter alia_, of having conceived a cruel
hatred and malice against one Adam Clark, and with having for the space
of a year used all devilish and unholy means to be revenged upon him.
On a November night in 1606, between eleven and midnight, Adam and his
wife being in bed, Isobel entered the house in the form of a black cat,
accompanied by a number of other cats, and made a great and fearful
noise, whereat Adam, his wife, and maid-servant were so frightened as
almost to go mad. Immediately afterwards the Devil appeared, in the
likeness of a black man, seized the servant's nightcap and cast it
on the fire, and then dragged her up and down the house. Who thereby
contracted a great sickness, so that she lay bed-fast, in danger of
her life, for the space of six weeks. Isobel was further accused of
having compassed the death of William Burnet and of laying on him a
fearful and uncouth sickness, by casting in at his door a gobbet of
raw, enchanted flesh. Whereafter the Devil nightly appeared in poor
William's house in the guise of a naked infant child for the space
of half a year. Occasionally he varied the performance by appearing
in the shape of Isobel herself, but being called by her name would
immediately vanish away. As a result of all which, Adam languished in
sickness for the space of three years, unable to obtain a cure, and at
last, in great "douleur and payne," departed this life. Another of her
victims was Robert Peddan, who remained sick for the space of one year
and six months, and then suddenly remembering that he owed Isobel nine
shilling and fourpence, and that before the time of his sickness, as he
had refused to pay it, she had delivered to him certain writings that
she kept in MS., and thereafter, with divers blasphemous speeches, told
him he should repent it. Remembering this, he sought out Isobel and
satisfied her the said sum, at the same time asking his health of her
for God's sake, saying, "If ye have done me any wrong or hurt, refrain
the same and restore to me my health." And within twenty-four hours he
was as well as ever before. Yet again, Margaret, the wife of Robert
Peddan, lying in bed, Isobel, or a spirit in her shape, entered his
house, seized Margaret by the shoulder and flung her upon the floor, so
that she swooned with fright, and was immediately seized with a fearful
and uncouth sickness. Isobel, hearing that rumours of her ill-doing
were abroad, caused Mrs. Peddan to drink with her, whereupon her
sickness left her for eight or ten days. But as Mrs. Peddan, learning
nothing from experience, declared _hic et ubique_ that Isobel was a
foul witch, she straightway laid another charm upon her, so that the
sickness returned. Isobel, being found guilty of all these and other
crimes, was ordered by her judges to be "taken to the Castle Hill of
Edinburgh, and there to be strangled at the stake until she be dead and
her body to be burnt in ashes, as convict of the said crimes; and all
her movable goods to be escheat and inbrought to our sovereign lord's
use, as convict of the said crimes." Which was done accordingly.

In 1622 Margaret Wallace was executed on the charge of inflicting and
causing diseases. The chief count against her was of having consulted
with Christiane Graham--burned as a witch some time before Margaret's
trial--how to cure Margaret Muir, "a bairne," of a disorder, "to which
end they went about twelve at night to a yard, and there used their
devilish charms, whereby the disease was removed from the bairne."

The next twenty years are filled with a monotonous record of
witch-trials, similar in essentials to those already quoted. Perhaps
the most outstanding is that of Catharine Oswald, who kept many
rendezvous with Satan, and cursed the yard of John Clerk so effectually
that for four years neither "kaill, hemp, nor other graine would grow
therein." Alice Nisbet, also famous in her day, was likewise convicted
of having "took paines off a woman in travell, by some charms and
horrible words; among which thir ware some, 'the bones to the fire and
the soull to the divill.'"

In 1633 twenty witches were executed, Sir George Home, of Manderston,
being the most zealous persecutor, chiefly, it was said, to spite his
wife, with whom he was not on good terms, and who had a taste for
Black Magic. Ten years later arose another fierce persecution, so that
in Fifeshire alone thirty women were executed--the local ministry
taking the lead in the prosecution. Two of the accused were domestic
servants in service at Edinburgh, and with that love of finery which
even now attends their kind. By their own confession they had been
introduced to the Devil by Janet Cranston, a notorious witch, and had
by him been promised that, if they gave themselves bodies and souls to
his allegiance, "they should be as trimlie clad as the best servants
in Edinburgh." Janet Barker, one of the twain, admitted having the
Devil's mark between her shoulders, and when a pin was thrust therein
it remained there for an hour before she noticed it. Needless to say,
both were "wirriet" (strangled) at the stake and burned. Agnes Fynnie
was convicted on no fewer than twenty counts of different offences,
chiefly of harming the health of personal enemies. Her defence was more
vigorous than was customary, but although she pleaded that of all the
witches already burned not one had mentioned her name, she was found
guilty and executed.

It must not be supposed that Satan did not make occasional efforts to
befriend his own. Thus we may learn from Sinclair's "Invisible World
Discovered" that he directly interfered, endeavouring to save the wife
of one Goodail, "a most beautiful and comely person," for whom he
had a particular regard, much to the jealousy of less well-favoured
witches. He even visited her prison and endeavoured to carry her off
through the air, so that "she made several loups upwards, increasing
gradually till her feet were as high as his breast." But James Fleming,
the gaoler, was a man of might. He caught hold of her feet, so that
it was a case of "Pull Devil, pull Gaoler," and the better man--which
is to say Mr. Fleming--won, and the prisoner was saved for subsequent
execution. On another occasion Satan actually released a witch from
the church-steeple of Culross, where she was confined. Unfortunately
for her, before they had gone far upon their aerial flight, she
happened, in the course of conversation, to mention the name of the
Deity--whereupon he dropped her.

Political ups and downs, whomever else they might affect, made no
difference in the hard lot of the witch--save, indeed, that she was
regarded as belonging to the opposite party by that in power. That did
not, however, gain for her the sympathy of the defeated. Thus the death
of Charles I., according to many, could only have been compassed by
the Powers of Darkness themselves. Even the brute creation seemed to
have realised this, if we may judge from the reputed fact that some of
the lions in the Tower of London died from the smell of a handkerchief
dipped in the martyred monarch's blood. "Old Noll" was declared, by
Royalists anxious to explain away their defeats, to be Satan's direct
agent, if not the Devil incarnate, the Commonwealth representing his
Kingdom upon Earth. Thus although the Republicans had done their
utmost in the way of witch-harrying, their efforts were but feeble
compared to those of the Royalists upon the glorious Restoration.
Obviously a witch must be a friend to crop-eared Roundheads--and
fearfully did she pay the penalty. Somewhere about 120 were executed
in the year 1661, immediately following the King's entering upon his
own again--the majority owing their arrest to the exertions of John
Kincaid and John Dick, witch-finders as eminent, though less famous,
than Matthew Hopkins himself. And now it was the turn of the victorious
Cavaliers to be regarded, by Presbyterian and Parliamentarian, as owing
their success to the help of Satan and his agents. Their Bishops were
reported to be cloven-footed and shadowless, their military commanders
to be bullet-proof by enchantment, and to possess horses that could
clamber among inaccessible rocks like foxes; the justices who put
fugitives on trial for treason were seen in familiar converse with the
Fiend, and one of them was known to have offered up his first-born son
to Satan.

A representative example of the trials held in the latter part of
the seventeenth century is that consequent upon the death of Sir
George Maxwell, of Pollock, slain, as was supposed, by the malice of
"some haggs and one wizard." A full account of it is given in the
"Memorialls" of Robert Law, writer, edited from his MS. by Charles
Kirkpatrick Sharpe. To put it briefly, Sir George, having been ill for
some time, having great pain in his side and shoulder, a dumb girl
called at the house and explained by signs that his waxen "picture"
was being melted before the fire in a certain woman's house, who had
a grudge against him. Search being made, his image was found up the
chimney. Two pins being found stuck in the figure's shoulder were
removed, whereupon Sir George recovered, and the woman was laid by
the heels and found to have several witch-marks. But very soon the
baronet was again taken ill. The witch's house, now inhabited by her
son, was again searched, and a second "portraitour," this time of clay,
found under the man's bolster. Arrested, he confessed that the Devil
had visited him, in company with four witches, had made the image
himself, and stuck pins in the appropriate limbs. The four witches were
apprehended, and, with the young man, burnt at Paisley; but this did
not prevent their victim's death. A few months later he died, "being
worn to a shadow," owing, according to the dumb girl, to the existence
of yet another "picture" which his friends had "slighted."

The last Scottish execution of a witch took place in 1722. The prisoner
was accused of having turned her daughter into a pony, shod by the
Devil and so ridden upon her--whence the girl was ever afterwards
lame. Found guilty, this last of a long line of martyrs was burned at
Dornoch, and scandalised the spectators--the weather being chilly--by
composedly warming her hands at the fire that was to consume her.

In 1735, English and Scottish statutes against witchcraft were alike
repealed, much to the horror of the seceders from the Established Kirk,
who, in their annual confession of National and Personal Sins, gave
a prominent place to "The Penal Statutes against Witches having been
repealed by Parliament contrary to the express Law of God."




CHAPTER XIII

OTHER PERSECUTIONS


The universality of the belief in witchcraft carried in its train
international belief in the efficacy of persecution as its cure. When
one nation led the others were bound to follow, and accordingly we
find that every European country--to say nothing of non-Christian
peoples--lent itself vigorously to this form of legalised murder.
But so similar are the details of these proceedings that witchcraft
might claim to have preceded Volapuk or Esperanto as an international
bond. Everywhere the persecution followed the same, or parallel lines,
differing only in minor national idiosyncrasies. So far as Catholic
countries were in question this was natural enough--seeing that all
alike drew their inspiration from the same source--Innocent VIII.'s
Bull; while the Protestants, however much they might object to Papal
persecution of their peculiar tenets, heartily agreed with both the
purpose and the method of those directed at the common enemy of all.

In France, as elsewhere, the seventeenth century saw the witch-fever
rise to its most extravagant height. Though it is difficult to
compare them in degree--where all alike rose to the highest level of
bloodthirstiness--the French may be said to have excelled their ancient
rivals in thoroughness. Thus the direction of the campaign was in the
direct control of either Church or State, rather than being submitted
to the ordinary process of the law; they were official rather than
local, and witchcraft a religious and political rather than a merely
criminal offence. Thus, in 1634, Urbain Grandier, who had satirised
Richelieu, was accused, at the Cardinal's direct instigation, of
practising the Black Art upon some nuns at Loudun, and was in due
course burned at the stake; and many similar cases are recorded. A
point in which the French practice differed from the English in the
matter of witch-finding was that, while in England the affair was
usually entrusted to the care of such comparatively humble persons as
Matthew Hopkins, the French Commissioner was an official of importance,
and usually, as in the case of Pierre de Lancre, of education. This
gentleman, sent as we have seen at the instance of the King, according
to his own account, by the Parliament of Bordeaux to investigate the
charges of wholesale witchcraft against the inhabitants of the Labourt
district in 1608, has himself provided us with illuminating insight
into such an official's frame of mind. This is shown even more clearly
in his introductory argument than in his book--already frequently
referred to--written to prove the inconstancy of devils and bad angels.
Towards this end he sets out to prove the inconstancy of the natives
of Labourt and their peculiar liability to Satan's snares. Then he
argues that Labourt must, on the face of it, breed an unsettled and
inconstant race, being both mountainous and situated on the borders
of three kingdoms, France, Spain, and Navarre. Its language, being
likewise varied--a mixture of French, Spanish, and Basque--is in itself
another powerful argument. Its inhabitants, again, are for the most
part sailors, when they might with better reason be farmers, because
they prefer the inconstant sea to the firm, unchanging land. Their
long absences, he finds, tends to make their wives unfaithful--another
powerful impetus towards witchcraft. Although the Commissioner--a man
of open mind--confesses that their dress is not indecent; he has grave
doubts about their dances, being not quiet and respectable, but rowdy
in the extreme, and accompanied upon the tambourine, an instrument
of baleful significance. They live very largely upon apples--which
may also account for their proneness to forbidden things, the Devil's
power over the apple having been recognised ever since the days of Eve.
De Lancre even puts forward the assertions of heretical Scottish and
English merchants, who have visited Bordeaux to buy wines, and have
there assured him that they have often seen large troops of dæmons
heading across the sea straight for Labourt. From all of which the
Commissioner concludes that there is scarcely a family in the district
but is more or less deeply involved in or connected with witchcraft and
its practices.

The same causes which rendered the French persecutions more severe
while they lasted, also brought it about that any relaxation of the
Governmental attitude diminished them to a greater extent than was the
case in England, where witchcraft had a more personal aspect. The armed
peasant, who, musket in hand, proved his possession of supernatural
powers by defeating the King's best troops led by a Marshall of France,
among the bare peaks of the Cevennes, in defence of his detestable
heresies, might look for nothing but ruthless extermination as a
wizard; but even Governments have human memories, and the humble old
woman muttering spells in obscure corners of the kingdom, was apt
to be overlooked. Sometimes, too, as the years passed, the Royal
Person actually interfered to shield the accused from less official
persecution. Thus, when in 1672, a number of shepherds were arrested
in Normandy and the Parliament of Rouen prepared for an investigation
similar to that previously held at Labourt, the King ordered all the
accused to be set at liberty, with salutary effect in dissipating the
increasing witch-fever. Some ten years later, however, a Royal edict
revived all previous ordinances against sorcery and divination. Many
such cases were tried before the "Chambre Ardente," the last being that
of a woman named Voisin, condemned for sorcery and poisoning in 1680.
The anti-sorcery laws were in force until the mid-eighteenth century,
while as proof of the persistence of the superstition we may again
quote the case of the Soubervies, in 1850, already referred to.

Germany--the land of sentiment, no less than of common sense--was not
different from her neighbours in her method of regarding the witch. The
German, though he protested against the methods of the Inquisition, as
applied to himself, could have no objection to its treatment of the
witch-question. Cases were sometimes heard in the civil court, but
were far more frequently left to the tender mercies of the Church. At
the end of the fifteenth century the Inquisitors Sprenger and Kramer
taught the whole duty of an Inquisitor in the "Malleus Maleficarum,"
and found many apt pupils throughout the Empire. Persecutions of
unprecedented fierceness broke out in many districts, one of the
most striking examples being that at Trier in the second half of the
sixteenth century. For many years there had been failure of crops
and increasing sterility throughout the land, attributed by many to
the increase of witchcraft and the malice of the Devil. In time, so
ferocious became the popular antipathy that scarcely any who fell under
suspicion had the remotest chance of escape. It was perhaps the most
democratic persecution recorded in history; neither rank nor wealth was
of the least avail in face of accusation. Canon Linden, an eye-witness,
relates that two Burgomasters, several councillors and associate
judges, canons of sundry collegiate churches, parish priests and rural
deans were among the victims. Dr. Dietrich Flade, judge of the secular
court and deputy governor of the city, strove to check the persecution
and fell a victim to it for his pains. He was accused, tortured into
confessing various crimes of sorcery, and burned at the stake in 1589.
A Dutch scholar, Cornelius Loos by name, a reputed disciple of Wierus
and tenant of a professorial chair at the Trier University, also
ventured to enter a protest against the prevalent madness. Failing in
his appeal to the authorities he wrote a book, in which his views were
set forth at length. It was seized while in the printers' hands and
its author cast into prison. He was, however, released in the spring
of 1593 upon uttering a solemn recantation--published in book form six
years later by Del Rio. Far from curing the barrenness of the land, the
persecution only increased it--and thus provided its own cure--dying
down at last when the general poverty prevented the necessary funds
being provided for its maintenance.

A pathetic incident is recorded of another formidable outburst of the
witch-mania--at Bamberg in 1628. The Burgomaster, Johannes Junius, was
among those put on trial. In the beginning he denied all the charges
against him, but being put to the torture, confessed that he had been
present at a witch gathering and a witch-dance and had desecrated the
Host. Such a confession, though it spared him further torture, did not,
of course, stay his execution. Some little time after, having partially
recovered from his first agonies, he was in great distress of mind as
to the opinion his dearly-loved daughter should hold of him after his
death. With sorely maimed hands he yet managed to scrawl a letter and
ensure its reaching her. In it he appeals in agony of heart that she
shall not believe the matter of his enforced confession: "Innocent
have I come into prison, innocent have I been tortured, and innocent
must I die.... I confessed only in order to escape the great anguish
and bitter torture, such as it was impossible for me longer to bear."
Unfortunately the torturers were never satisfied with a confession
unless it implicated other people as well, and the case of Junius
and some of his friends and neighbours who also suffered formed no
exception to the rule.

The Bamberg persecution was succeeded by one at Wurzburg in the
following year. Fortunately the noble Jesuit priest and poet, Friedrich
von Spee, was appointed confessor of those sentenced to death, and was
inspired to write, in 1631, his "Cautio Criminalis," which, published
anonymously, did much to stem the tide of persecution. "Incredible
among us Germans," he begins, "and especially (I blush to say it)
among Catholics, are the popular superstitions, envy, calumnies,
backbitings, insinuations and the like, which being neither punished by
the magistrates nor refuted by the pulpit, first stir up suspicion of
witchcraft. All the Divine judgments which God has threatened in Holy
Writ are now ascribed to witches. No longer do God or Nature aught, but
witches everything."

It was a long time, however, before such enlightened views could obtain
universal credence, and it was in Germany that the last European
execution for witchcraft took place, so lately as 1793.

The international epidemic did not spread to Sweden till the end of the
century, when it broke out, in more than usually eccentric form, in the
village of Mohra. It was chiefly remarkable for the number of children
concerned. "Four score and five persons, fifteen of them children, were
condemned, and most, if not all of them, were burnt and executed. There
were besides six-and-thirty children that ran the gauntlet and twenty
were whipt on the hands at the Church-door every Sunday for three weeks
together." The whole proceedings were, indeed, almost a children's
drama and no emanation of childish imagination but was eagerly
swallowed by a normally sober and sensible community. Most probably,
indeed, the whole affair had its foundation in some myth or folk-story
more or less popular in all the local nurseries. Indeed, were we of
the present generation to return to the earlier belief in lycanthropy
and the ceaseless malignancy of ubiquitous were-wolves, it is easily
within the bounds of possibility that "Red Riding Hood," a story which
quite conceivably owes its origin to the same superstition, might bring
about some similar panic. An imaginative child might easily mix up the
grandmother in the story with the wolf who devours her: might thus come
to the conclusion that his own grandmother occasionally masqueraded in
the form of a wolf: might in time convince himself that he had actually
seen her thus transmogrified, and might thus in time bring not only
his own venerable relative but those of half the other children in the
school that he attended under unpleasant suspicion and not improbably
to a more unpleasant death.

The mainstay of the Mohra panic was the sudden belief--propagated by
the children themselves--that some hundreds of them had been brought
under the power of the Devil by local witches. The whole community
took the alarm, the Government was appealed to, and a Royal Commission
embodied to investigate the charges--with sanguinary results. It
was declared that the witches instructed the children to go to the
cross-ways, and there to invoke the Devil, begging him to carry them to
the Blockula, the favourite local mountain meeting-place for Sabbaths.
Satan, in answering their prayers, appeared in many forms, the most
original being that of a man with a red beard, wearing a grey coat,
red and blue stockings, a high-crowned hat adorned with ribbons of
many colours, and preposterous garters. So attired he must have wanted
only a magic pipe to serve as double to the Pied Piper of Hamelin,
the Teutonic legend most nearly recalled by the whole circumstance.
He provided the children with mounts and anointed them with unguent
composed of the scrapings of altars and the filings of church-clocks.
Another account says that the witches accompanied the children, riding
with them to the Blockula on men's backs--the said men, upon arriving
there, being propped against the wall, fast asleep. Now and again they
preferred to ride upon posts, or goats transfixed upon spits, and they
flew through walls, chimneys, and windows without either injuring
themselves or breaking the glass and bricks.

The actual transportation of the children gave rise to many weighty
arguments. All the time they asserted they were at the Blockula, their
parents declared that they had held them asleep in their arms. It was
finally concluded that their nocturnal travels might be either in the
flesh or the spirit, according to circumstances. So firmly did many
parents credit their children's assertions that a local clergyman
determined to watch his little son throughout the night, holding him
tightly in his arms; but even this ocular demonstration did not serve
to convince the mother.

Upon the Blockula was declared to be a fine house, having a gate
painted in very gay colours. Within it were a large banqueting-hall
and other rooms. The food served at the banquets consisted of such
nourishing fare as coleworts, bacon, and bread, butter, milk and
cheese--all of them, be it noted, familiar to childish palates, as
was the feast of the Lancashire witches--quoted elsewhere--to the
"Informer." Those who attended the Blockula gave birth to sons and
daughters, who were married in their turn to each other, their children
being toads and serpents. They built houses, but so badly that the
walls fell upon them, making them black and blue; they were beaten,
abused, and laughed at--yet when on one occasion they thought the Devil
was dead, the place was filled with wailings and lamentations. As
usually happened in such persecutions, the bloodshed at last brought
people to their senses--perhaps the execution of fifteen children gave
their parents pause. At all events, the Commission was in due course
dissolved, and the persecution came to a sudden end, though prayers
continued to be offered weekly in the church against any other such
horrible visitation--as indeed they well might!

It is not my intention to give more than a general idea of the most
outstanding historic persecutions--for, as I have said, they differ
only in minor degrees in different times and places. There are,
however, yet one other group too striking to be ignored--those which
raged in the New England Colonies. It might have been supposed, by one
unconversant with human nature, that the memory of their own sufferings
would have softened the hearts of the colonists when they themselves
were in power. The reverse was the case; their enmity against their
former oppressors was diverted towards this new channel, gaining force
in the process. There is indeed some excuse to be found for their
mental attitude. Springing in the most cases from the humbler class,
they had many privations and sufferings to endure before they could
gain any respite in their newly-settled country to think of progressive
education. Their warfare against the Indians might well have given both
sides reason to think that the Devil was indeed arrayed upon the side
of their enemies--and in time the gloomy superstitions of the natives
served to buttress the imported beliefs of Europe.

From the beginning of the seventeenth century to the end the settlers
had been forced to devote most of their thoughts to means of
subsistence alone, and there had been no opportunity for speculative
thought to modify ideas which, standing still, became more and more
stereotyped. The precarious existence of the infant State also gave its
leaders every ground for taking the severest measures towards anything
considered to be dangerous to its welfare. As early as 1648, Margaret
Jones of Charlestone was accused of practising witchcraft. The charge
was "that she was found to have such a malignant touch as many persons,
men, women and children whom she stroked or touched in any affliction
or displeasure, were taken with deafness or vomiting, or other violent
pains or sickness." Governor Winthrop, in whose Journals the account is
found, also adds that "in prison there was seen in her arms a little
child which ran from her into another room, the officer following it,
it vanished."

Margaret Jones was found guilty of the crime of witchcraft, and was
hanged according to the law. Soon after her execution her husband
wished to go to Barbadoes in a vessel lying in Boston Harbour. He was
refused a passage as being the husband of a witch, and thereupon the
vessel began to roll as though it would turn over. Instead of the
phenomenon being attributed to the refusal to take an innocent man on
board, it was reported to the magistrate, and an officer was sent to
arrest Jones. On his exhibiting the warrant for the arrest, the vessel
instantly ceased to roll. Jones was thrown into prison, but there is no
evidence of his ever having been tried.

In 1655, Ann Hibbins was hanged at Boston for witchcraft; there were
witch-executions in different places at ever-decreasing intervals. One
of the most interesting cases of witchcraft was that of the Goodwin
family in 1688. A full account of this case is given by Cotton Mather,
"Minister of the Gospel," in a book which purported to contain "a
faithful account of many Wonderful and Surprising Things that have
befallen several Bewitched and Possessed Persons in New England." In
his own words, in 1689, "There dwells at this time in the South part of
Boston a sober and pious man, whose name is John Goodwin, whose Trade
is that of a Mason, and whose Wife (to whom a good Report gives a share
with him in all the characters of Virtue) has made him the Father of
six (now living) children. Of these children all but the eldest, who
works with his Father at his calling, and the youngest, who lives yet
upon the Breast of its mother, have laboured under the direful effects
of a (no less palpable than) stupendous WITCHCRAFT." After explaining
the godly and virtuous tendencies of the children and the excellence
of their upbringing and religious education, Mather says:--"Such
was the whole Temper and Courage of the children that there cannot
easily be anything more unreasonable than to imagine that a Design to
Dissemble could cause them to fall into any of their odd Fits."

In 1688 the eldest daughter, on examining the linen, found that some
of it was missing, and questioned the daughter of the washerwoman with
regard to it. The washerwoman--as might have happened in much later
times--used very bad language in her daughter's defence, whereupon
poor Miss Goodwin "became variously indisposed in her health, and was
visited with strange Fits, beyond those that attend an Epilepsy or
a Catalepsy, or those that they call the Diseases of Astonishment."
Shortly afterwards one of her sisters and two of her brothers were
seized in a like manner and "were all four tortured everywhere in a
manner so very grievous that it would have broken an heart of stone to
have seen their agonies." "Physicians were of no avail. Sometimes they
would be Deaf, sometimes Dumb, and sometimes Blind, and often all this
at once. One while their Tongues would be drawn down their throats,
another while they would be pulled out upon their chins to a prodigious
length. They would have their mouths opened into such wideness that
their Jaws went out of joint; and anon they would clap together with
a force like that of a Strong Spring-Lock. The same would happen to
their Shoulder-Blades, and their Elbows and Hand-wrists and several of
their Joints. They would at times ly in a benummed condition, and be
drawn together as those that are tyed Neck and Heels, and presently
be stretched out, yea, drawn Backwards to such a degree it was feared
the very skin of their Bellies would have crack'd." There were many
other symptoms which Mather relates with zealous satisfaction.--At
last the distracted father told the Magistrates of his suspicions
of the washerwoman Glover. On being examined, she gave such a poor
account of herself that she was committed to prison. It was found that
she could not say the Lord's Prayer, even when it was repeated to her
clause by clause, and when she was committed it was found that all
the children "had some present ease." The supposed witch was brought
to trial, but, being an Irishwoman, there were difficulties in her
understanding the questions, which told very badly against her. Orders
were given to search her house, and several small images--dolls,
perhaps--made of rags and stuffed with goat's-hair, were found. The
old woman then confessed "that her way to torment the objects of her
malice was by rubbing of her Finger with her spittle, and stroaking
of those little Images." When one of the images was brought to her,
she took it in her hand, and immediately one of the children fell into
fits before the whole assembly. Witnesses were easily found against
her, one of whom said that Glover had sometimes come down her chimney.
After her condemnation the worthy Mather visited her in prison, "but
she entertained me with nothing but Irish, which language I have not
Learning enough to understand without an Interpreter." On her way to
execution she declared that her death would not end the sufferings
of the children, as there were more in it besides herself; and so it
proved. The children would bark like dogs and purr like cats, and
they would fly like geese. "Such is Satanic perversity that if one
ordered them to Rub a clean table, they were able to do it without
any disturbance; if to rub a dirty Table, presumably they would,
with many Torments, be made uncapable." Mather relates that owing
to their Bewitchments, holy Books caused them horrible agonies. One
girl told him that if she went to read the Bible, her eyes would be
strangely twisted and blinded, and her neck presumably broken, but
also that if anyone else did read the Bible in the Room, though it
were wholly out of her sight, and without the least voice or noise of
it, she would be cast into very horrible agonies. "_A Popish Book_,"
says Mather, "she would endure very well and also books such as the
'Oxford Tests'"--Mather must be forgiven for being a partisan--but
"my grand-father Cotton's catechism called 'Milk for Babes' and the
Assemblie's Catechism would bring hideous convulsions on the child if
she look'd into them." With a certain unconscious jocularity, Mather
hopes that he has "not spoilt the credit of the books by telling how
much the Devil hated them."

At last Cotton Mather and some devout neighbours kept a day of prayer
on behalf of the afflicted children, and gradually "the liberty of the
children increased daily more and more, and their vexation abated by
degrees," though demons and spirits continued to trouble Boston for
some time after.

In 1692 Salem village was the scene of a fierce outbreak against
witchcraft, which lasted some 16 months. Cotton Mather attributes
it to the Indian "Paw-Maws," but Hutchinson, with his usual common
sense, probably hits upon at least one of the real causes. Mather had
published a book on witchcraft in 1689. It was strongly recommended in
England by Richard Baxter, who a short time later published his own
"Certainty of the World of Spirits." This contained a testimony to
Mather, and he, in his turn, caused it to be widely circulated in New
England. The witch epidemic at Salem occurred but a short time after
this and Hutchinson attributes it to "Mr. Baxter's book," and "his and
his father's" (_i.e._, Mather's book and that of his father) and the
false principles and frightful stories that "filled the people's mind
with great fears and dangerous notions."

The witchcraft scare in Salem began in the house of Mr. Parris,
minister of the place, and several other people soon began to act in
an unusual manner. "They crept into holes and under chairs and stools.
They used antick gestures and spake ridiculous speeches and fell into
fits. After some time and a day of prayer kept, the afflicted persons
named several that they said they saw in their fits afflicting them,
and in particular an Indian woman." The Indian woman, Tihuba was
her name, was deposed to have used charms, at the beginning of the
outbreak, for the discovery of the witches, but the fact of her being
an Indian would probably have been sufficient to cast suspicion upon
her. On being beaten and threatened by her master she confessed that
she was a witch, and said the Devil urged her to sign a book. Two other
women, Osborn and Good, were accused by the Parris children of having
bewitched them, and warrants were issued for their arrest. All three
were sent to the jail in Boston. Good's little daughter, Dorcas, aged
five, was called upon to testify against her mother, and her evidence
amounted only to this: "That her mother had 2 birds, one black and
one green, and these birds hurt the children and afflicted persons."
Sarah Good was sentenced to be hanged. The Rev. Mr. Voyes told her as
she stood on the scaffold, "You are a witch and you know you are a
witch." She replied, "You are a liar. I am no more a witch than you are
a wizard, and if you take my life God will give you blood to drink."
Sarah Osborn died in prison, and the bill of the Boston jailer for the
expenses of both women runs thus:--

                                   £ s. d.

 To chains for Sarah Good and
 Sarah Osborn                        14  0

 To keeping Sarah Osborn from
 the 7th March to 10th May,
 when she died, being nine weeks
 and two days                      1  3  5

Tihuba was kept in prison for 13 months and was then sold to pay her
prison fees.

The arrest of these three women was followed almost immediately
by many more accusations. The arrival of Governor Phips in May,
armed with a charter which empowered the general court to erect and
constitute judicatories and courts of record, or other courts of which
the Governor was to appoint the judges, gave a great impetus to the
persecution. Finding the prison full of witches he gave orders for
their immediate trial. All through June and July the cases crowded one
upon another, and such was the pitch of superstitious terror to which
the people of Salem had arrived, that two dogs were put to death for
witchcraft. The cases of Martha and Giles Carey, and of Rebecca Nurse,
are so well-known that we will rather turn to the trial of Susanna
Martin, held in the court of Oyer and terminated at Salem on June 29th,
1692.

Cotton Mather relates of her that:--"Susanna Martin, pleading 'Not
Guilty' to the indictment of witchcraft brought in against her,
there were produced the evidences of many persons very sensibly and
grievously bewitched, who all complained of the prisoner at the bar as
the person they believed the cause of their miseries."

At the examination the cast of Susanna's eye was supposed to strike the
afflicted people to the ground whether they saw it or not.

 _Magistrate._ Pray what ails these people?

 _Martin._ I don't know.

 _Mag._ But what do you think ails them?

 _Martin._ I don't desire to spend my judgment upon it.

 _Mag._ Don't you think they are bewitched?

 _Martin._ No, I do not think they are.

 _Mag._ Tell us your thoughts about them then.

 _Martin._ No, my thoughts are my own when they are in; but when they
 are out they are another's. Their master----

 _Mag._ Their Master? Who do you think _is their Master_?

 _Martin._ If they be dealing in the Black Art, you may know as well as
 I.

 _Mag._ Well. What have you done towards this?

 _Martin._ Nothing at all.

 _Mag._ Why, it is you or your appearance.

 _Martin._ I cannot help it.

 _Mag._ Is it not _your Master_? How comes your appearance to hurt
 these?

 _Martin._ How do I know? He that appeared in the shape of Samuel, a
 glorified Saint, may appear in any-one's shape.

John Allen, of Salisbury, testified that he having refused because
of the weakness of his oxen to cart some staves at Susanna Martin's
request, she was angry and said, "It had been as good that he had, for
his oxen should never do him much more service." The witness answered
her, "Dost thou threaten me, thou old witch? I'll throw thee into the
brook!" to escape which she flew over the bridge and escaped. From
that time various misfortunes happened to his oxen and they ended by
swimming out into the sea. Of fourteen good oxen only one was saved,
the rest were cast up drowned in different places.

John Atkinson also testified to the bewitching of cattle by Martin,
and Bernard Peache said, "that Being in Bed, on a Lord's Day night, he
heard a Scrubbing at the Window, whereat he then saw Susanna Martin
come in and jumped down upon the floor." She took hold of witness's
feet and drew his body up into a heap. For two hours he could neither
speak nor stir, but at length he caught her hand and bit three of her
fingers to the bone. Whereupon she went down the stairs and out of the
door. Snow was lying on the ground and drops of blood were found upon
it, as also in a bucket on the left-hand side of the door. The marks
of her two feet were found just without the threshold, but there was
no sign of them any further off. Another accusation against Susanna
was that after a long walk her feet were dry when other people's would
have been wet. John Kembal had wished to buy a puppy of Martin, but as
she would not let him choose the one he wanted he bought one elsewhere.
"Whereupon Susanna Martin replied, 'If I live I'll give him puppies
enough.' Within a few days after this, Kembal coming out of the woods,
there arose a little cloud in the N.W. and Kembal immediately felt a
force upon him that made him not able to avoid running upon the stumps
of trees that were before him, albeit that he had a broad plain cartway
before him; but though he had his ax also upon his shoulder to endanger
him in his Falls, he could not forbear going out of his way to tumble
over them. When he came below the Meeting House there appeared unto him
a little thing like a Puppy of a Darkish colour, and it shot Backwards
and forwards between his Leggs. He had the courage to use all possible
Endeavours of cutting it with his ax; but he could not Hit it; the
Puppy gave a jump from him and went, as to him it seem'd, into the
ground. Going a little further, there appeared unto him a Black Puppy,
somewhat bigger than the first, but as Black as a Cole. Its motions
were quicker than those of his ax; it flew at his Belly and away; then
at his Throat and over his Shoulder one way and then over his Shoulder
another. His heart now began to fail him and he thought the Dog would
have tore his Throat out. But he recovered himself and called upon God
in his Distress; and naming the Name of Jesus Christ, it vanished away
at once. The Deponent spoke not one word of these accidents for fear
of affrighting his wife. But the next morning Edmund Eliot going into
Martin's house, this woman asked him where Kembal was? He Replyed, 'At
home abed for aught he knew.' She returned, 'They say he was frighted
last night.' Eliot asked, 'With what?' She answered, 'With Puppies.'
Eliot asked when she heard of it, for he had heard nothing of it; she
rejoined, 'about the Town'; altho' Kembal had mentioned the Matter to
no creature Living."

Susanna could do nothing against such evidence as this. She was found
"Guilty" and executed on July 19th.

In sixteen months nineteen persons were hanged, one (Giles Corry)
was pressed to death and eight more were condemned. More than fifty
confessed themselves to be witches, a hundred and fifty were in prison
and two hundred others were accused. But people were growing weary;
and it was thought time to cease the persecutions. By about April,
1693, all those imprisoned were set at liberty, and others who had
fled the country were allowed to return home. It is a striking comment
that Mr. Parris, in whose house the supposed witchcrafts had begun,
was accused by his congregation "that he hath been the beginner and
procurer of the sorest afflictions, not to this village only, but to
this whole country that did ever befall them," and he was dismissed.




CHAPTER XIV

PHILTRES, CHARMS AND POTIONS


Were it not that dogs and horses have frequently been observed to
express their fear of ghosts, an apt definition for man would be "the
superstitious animal." Certainly no human feeling is more universal or
more enduring. If, as I have endeavoured to prove, the first mother
was the first witch, she must have brought superstition with her as a
legacy from the unknown world. Not only is it universal in mankind,
it is also essential to mankind, if only that it is the one barrier
between them and the tyranny of fact. As many-headed as a Hydra, it is
to be found in one form or other, in the composition of every human
being, from the sage to the savage. Dr. Johnson's idiosyncrasy for
touching every post he passed upon his walks abroad, Napoleon's belief
in his star, the burglar's faith in his lump of coal as his surest
safeguard against discovery, and the bunch of bells which every Italian
waggoner hangs about his team to scare away errant demons, are all
alike variations upon the one theme--humanity's revolt against the
tyranny of knowledge. Our boasted education avails nothing against
the rock upon which superstition is securely based. The Girton girl
who wears a bracelet hung with lucky-pigs, or rejoices when she finds
white heather growing upon a brae-side, may not perhaps consciously
accept them as capable of influencing her fortunes, any more than
does the card-player believe with his head that if he wins when not
playing for money that his next gamble will result in loss, or the
race-course punter that a horse whose name includes some particular
word such as gold, or love, or black will, for that reason, win races.
But all alike have in their hearts this unexpressed belief, and though
they may not admit it, does any unexpected good fortune befall them,
their mascot has some share of their thanks. Few of us but hold that
a certain colour, as, for instance, green, or a certain stone, as the
opal, is unlucky. Many of us would not pass under a ladder if we could
help it, even though we know that we are thus upholding a superstition
based upon a former connection between a ladder and a gallows. In
Paris, fashionable people carry little images of their special friends
and in case of their illness mutter prayers or charms over the part
affected. Indeed, those who protest most strongly their freedom from
such degrading weakness thereby show themselves the more believing--he
who resolutely walks under every ladder he passes as a mute protest is
but acknowledging the faith he seeks to outrage.

All these modern forms of civilised superstition are, of course,
survivals from a former age. Some of them, as, for instance, that
of spilling salt or sitting thirteen at table, can be traced back
to religious or other sources. Others, again, have endured from the
earliest days of the human race. Many directly emanate from the art
of witchcraft. A full-fledged witch must have her regular recipes
and prescriptions--the first witch as much as the last. With the
genius that made her a witch, she must seize and formulate the
shadowy conceptions that form so large a share of her _clientèle's_
beliefs; with her power of organisation, she must elaborate and adapt
them to individual needs; in answer to the primitive appeal, she
must return the full-fledged spell or charm. As we have seen, her
magical powers were exercised in various directions; her methods were
consequently as variant. In her capacity as healer, and conversely as
disease-inflicter, her various spells must cover all the ills that
flesh is heir to. She must be able to cure the disease she inflicts;
more, those who combat her must have their own ammunition of the like
kind. To the Greek Abracadabra the Church must oppose the sign of the
Cross or the mention of the Trinity. Thus in time arose an enormous
store of such early methods of faith cure--a store which has since
accumulated to such vast proportions as make it hopeless to do more
than enumerate a few gleaned from various ages and countries as
examples of the rest.

A great number of these charms are given by Wierus, who is severely
reprobated by Bodin for propagating such iniquities. Toothache being a
common and distracting complaint, there were various recipes for its
cure. To repeat the following was found to be very efficacious:--

 Galbes, Galbat, Galdes, Galdat.

Or it was equally good to write the following on a piece of paper, and
then to hang it round your neck:--

 Strigiles, falcesque, dentatae.
 Dentium, dolorem persanate.

Another and more religious means was to quote John, ch. ix., concerning
the curse of the blind man, and Exodus, ch. xii., where it is written
that no bone of the Passover shall be broken; and then to touch your
teeth during Mass, by which time it was more than probable that your
pains should cease. Ague, another common complaint, had several
remedies. You might either write Abracadabra triangularly and hang
it round your neck, or visit at dead of night the nearest cross-road
five different times, and there bury a new-laid egg (this has never
been known to fail), or emulate Ashmole, the astrologer, who wrote in
1661:--

 I took early in the morning a good dose of elixir and hung three
 spiders about my neck; they drove my ague away.

Against mad-dog bite there were more complicated methods than mere
Pasteurisation, and what is more, you had a large choice. A cure was
effected by writing on a piece of bread the words:--

 Irioni Khiriori effera Kuder fere.

then swallowing it; or writing on a piece of paper or bread the words:--

 Oh, King of Glory, Jesus Christ, come in peace in the name of the
 Father + max in the name of the Son + max in the name of the Holy
 Ghost, prax, Gaspar, Melchior, Balthasar + prax + max + God imax +.

Some people were known to have been cured by a man who wrote

 Hax, pax, max, Deus adimax

on an apple, which he gave the patient to eat; but this, says Wierus,
was very impious.

According to Cato, bones out of joint could be put back into place by
the charm:--

 Danata, daries, dardaries, astataries.

Divers were but little distinguished from one another, and we find a
number of cures for fevers included under one generic form. Several
cures are given by Wierus:--

 Wash your hands with the patient and say Psalm 144. "Exaltabo te, Deus
 meus Rex."

Or:--

 Take the invalid's hand and say "Acque facilis tibi febris haec fit,
 atque Mariae Virgini Christi partus."

Or:--

 Take three holy wafers, and write on the first, "So is the Father,
 so is Life"; on the second, "So is the Son, so is the Saint"; on
 the third, "So is the Holy Ghost, so is the remedy." Take these
 three wafers to the fever patient and tell him to eat them on three
 consecutive days, neither eating nor drinking anything else; also say
 fifteen times daily the Pater and the Ave.

A similar prescription is found in the following:--

 Cut an apple in three places and write on the first, "Increatus
 Pater"; on the second, "Immensus Pater"; and on the third, "Aeternus
 Pater"; then let the patient eat them fasting on three different days.

The following savours little less of religion:--

 For fever wryt thys words on a lorell lef + Ysmael + Ysmael + adjuro
 vos per angelum ut soporetur iste Homo. And ley thys lef under hys
 head that he mete not thereof and let hym ete Letuse oft and drynk
 Ip'e seed smal grounden in a mortar and temper yt with ale.

A cure for epilepsy was contained in the following words:--

 Gaspare fert myrrham, thus Melchior, Balthasar aurum
 Haec tria cui secum portabit nomina regum
 Soluitur a morbo Christi pietate caduco.

Another remedy was to take the hand of the patient and say in his ear:--

 I conjure you by the Sun, the Moon, the Gospel of the Day, given of
 God to Saint Hubert, Gilles, Corneille and Jein, that you get up
 without falling again, in the name of the Father, the Sonn and the
 Holy Ghost. Amen.

For the cure of headache Pliny recommends a plant growing on the head
of a statue (_i.e._, that has never touched the ground), gathered in
the lappet of any one of the garments, and attached to the neck with a
red string.

Against the King's Evil, vervaine, plucked with the root, wrapped in
a leaf, and warmed under cinders, was considered efficacious. This
might at first sight seem to differ little in character from a medical
prescription, whether useless or no, but to be efficacious certain
conditions must be complied with. It must be applied, that is to say,
by a young and fasting virgin, and the patient must receive it fasting.
While touching his hand the virgin must say, "Apollo, let not the
plague increase which a virgin has allayed." And thereafter she must
spit three times.

Pliny also provides us with a recipe against accidents in general,
originally taken from the Druids of Gaul:--"Carry about your person the
plant 'selago,' gathered without the use of iron and with the right
hand passed through the left sleeve of the tunic, as though committing
a theft. When you gather it your clothing must be white, your feet
bare and clean, while a sacrifice of bread and wine must be offered
previously."

There were also many specific cures for different accidents. An
incantation for thorn-pricks is found in the recorded case of one
Mr. Smerdon:--"When our Saviour Christ was on earth He pricked His
forefinger on the right hand with a black thorn, or whatever it may be,
and the Blood sprang up to Heaven, nor moath, nor rust, nor canker did
corrupt, and if Mr. Smerdon will put his trust in God his will do the
same. In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost."
This is to be repeated three times, and at the end Amen and the Lord's
Prayer are to be said.

A once-popular "prayer" for a "scalt" is the following:--

 Their was two angels came from the East. One carried Fire, the other
 carried Frost. Out Fire. In Frost. Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

A more modern version runs thus:--

 There were three Angels came from East and West,
 One brought Fire and another brought Frost,
 And the Third it was the Holy Ghost.
 Out Fire. In Frost, &c., &c.

A simple way of extracting an arrow is:--

 Say three times, while kneeling, the Pater and Ave, and then + add
 these words:--A Jewish soldier evilly inclined struck Jesus Christ +
 Lord Jesus Christ I pray Thee + by this iron + by this lance + by this
 blood + and by this water, draw out this iron + in the name, &c., &c.

There are several charms useful for stanching blood. One runs:--

 Jesus that was in Bethlehem born and baptized was in the flumen
 Jordane, as stinte the water at hys comyng, so stinte the blood of
 thys Man N. thy servaunt throw the vertu of Thy Holy Name--Jesu--and
 of Thy cosyn swete Saint Jon. And sey thys charme fyve tymes, with
 fyve Paternosters in the worschip of the fyve woundys.

Another runs:--

 In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti, carat, Cara, sarite,
 confirma consana imabolite.

And another:--

 Sepa + sepaga + sepagoga + Blood cease to flow. All is consummated in
 the Name of the Father + podendi + and of the son + pandera + and of
 the Holy Spirit + pandorica + peace be with you. Amen.

The following simple charm may be found efficacious against the
assaults of stinging-nettles:--

 Nettle in, Dock out,
 Dock in, Nettle out,
 Nettle in, Dock out,
 Dock rub, Nettle out.

The famous Nothhemd, or "_chemise de nécessité_," had such magical
qualities that it was worn alike by men to protect them against arrows
and other weapons in battle, and by women to assist them in their
delivery. It was spun by virgins upon a night in Christmas week. On the
breast were two heads: on the right side that of a bearded man wearing
a morion, that on the left being hideously ugly and having a crown
like that of Beelzebub. By a curious confusion of thought, a cross was
placed on either side of these heads.

From spells and charms against disease and accident we may turn to
those intended to protect against injury from outside agencies, as, for
example, caterpillars, serpents, and particularly thieves.

Were your cabbages or roses suffering from the over-attentive
caterpillar you had no need to approach the chemist for a remedy. In
Thuringia, for example, they might be banished from the cabbage-patch
if a woman could be found to run naked round the field or garden before
sunrise on the day of the annual fair. In Cleves it was sufficient to
say:--"Beloved caterpillar, this meat that you are having in the autumn
profits you as little as it profits the Virgin Mary when, in eating
and drinking, people do not speak of Jesus Christ. In the name of God.
Amen."

Yet another infallible cure was to pick a switch in the neighbourhood
of an adulterer's house, or, by a curious contrast, that of an upright
magistrate, and to strike with it the infected cabbages. Provided you
walk straight through and across the cabbage-bed, the caterpillars
will faint and fall away, but if you turn round you lose all chance of
getting rid of them.

A good way of exterminating serpents, toads, lizards, and other vermin
was to obtain a supply of the herb called "serpentine." When making
use of it you must draw three rings on the earth, and say:--In nomine
Patris an + et Filii elion + et Spiritus sancti tedion + Pater Noster.
Then say three times:--"Super aspidem et basilicum ambulabis et
conculcabis leonem et draconem."

The numerous aids towards discovering thieves seem to indicate that
the difficulty of distinguishing between meum and tuum is of no
modern growth. Many religious formulæ were, of course, pressed into
the detective service, perhaps the most famous being the curse of
Saint Adalbert. Such value was placed upon it that the Church only
permitted its employment with the licence of the Bishop under pain
of excommunication. It is of interminable length, and commences as
follows:--"In the authority of all-powerful God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost and of the Holy Virgin Mary, mother of our Lord Jesus Christ and
of the holy angels and archangels, and of Saint Michael and of John
the Baptist, in the name of the apostle Saint Peter and of the other
apostles, of Saint Sylvester, Saint Adalbert, and of all Confessors,
of Saint Aldegonde, of holy virgins, of all the saints which are in
Heaven and on the earth to whom power is given to bind and unbind, we
excommunicate, damn, curse, and anathematise and forbid the entrance
into Holy Mother Church of these thieves, 'sacrilegists,' ravishers,
their companions, coadjutors, and coadjutrices who have committed this
theft, or who have taken any part in it," &c., &c.

Another method combines an invocation with the use of a crystal:--

 Turn towards the East, make a cross above the crystal with olive oil,
 and write the name of Saint Helen below this cross. Then a young boy
 of legitimate birth must take the crystal in his right hand, while
 you kneel down behind him and say three times devoutly, "I pray you,
 holy Lady Helen, mother of King Constantine, who have found the cross
 of our Lord Jesus Christ, that in the name and favour of this very
 holy devotion and invention of the cross; in the name of this very
 holy cross; in favour of this joy that you experienced when you found
 this very holy cross; in consideration of the great love you bore your
 son, King Constantine; in short, in the name of all the good things
 you enjoy for ever, may it please you to show in this crystal what I
 ask and am longing to know." Then the boy will see the angel in the
 crystal, and you will ask what you want, and the angel will reply.
 This should be done at sunrise and when the sun has risen.

A simpler and more homely means runs thus:--

 Go to a running river, and take as many little pebbles as there are
 suspected people. Carry them to your house and make them red-hot; bury
 them under the threshold over which you most commonly pass into the
 house, and leave them there three days. Then dig them up when the sun
 is up, then put a bowl of water in the middle of the circle in which
 there is a cross, having written upon it: "Christus vicit, Christus
 regnat, Christus imperat." The bowl having been set and signed with
 the cross, with a conjuration by the passion of Christ, by his death
 and resurrection, &c., throw the pebbles one after the other in the
 water, each one in the name of the suspects, and when you come to the
 pebble of the thief, it will make the water boil.

Wierus sagely adds the comment that it is not "difficult for the Devil
to make the water boil in order to convict the innocent."

A means of getting a little private revenge upon the thief or the
witch, even if the harm they have done you has ceased, is as follows:--

 Cut on Saturday morning, before sunrise, a branch of nut-tree a year
 old, saying, "I cut you, branch of this summer, in the name of him
 whom I mean to strike or mutilate." Having done that, put a cloth on
 the table saying, "In nomine Patris + et Filii + et spiritus sancti."
 Say this three times with the following, "Et incute droch, myrroch,
 esenaroth, + betu + baroch + ass + maarot." Then say "Holy Trinity
 punish him who has harmed me, and take away the harm by your great
 justice + eson elion + emaris ales age"; then strike the cloth.

The numerous proverbs dealing with the tender passion seem to imply
that it is inclined to go by contraries, which perhaps accounts for
the particular nastiness of the ingredients composing love-philtres.
Another constant feature is that they are all double-edged, so that
the slightest deviation from the prescribed course may turn love into
hate, or _vice versâ_, and thus bring about a catastrophe, whereby,
doubtless, hang several morals. The "louppe" of a colt is a powerful
philtre. It must be ground to powder and drunk with the blood of the
beloved. Other specific means are the hair on the end of a wolf's tail,
the brain of a cat and of a lizard, certain kinds of serpents and fish,
and the bones of green frogs which have been eaten inside an ant-heap.
The frogs' bones must be treated thus:--"Throw the bones into water,
so that one part floats above water and the other sinks to the bottom.
Wrap them in silk, and hang them round your neck, and you will be
loved; but if you touch a man with them, hate will come of it."

Another prescription hard to equal runs thus:--

 Take all the young swallows from one nest; put them into a pot, and
 bury them until they are dead of hunger. Those which are found dead
 with open beaks will excite love, and those with closed beaks will
 bring hatred.

If two people hate each other, write the following words, "Abrac, amon,
filon," on a consecrated wafer, and if it be given them to eat they
will always be friends.

The use of images to work death and destruction upon your enemies has
been the subject of tales from time immemorial. Some kinds of images
are, of course, much more deadly than others, according to their
differences of construction; and whereas some may only subject the
victim to great discomfort, others have far more awful results. In any
case, a victim will do well to take every means of discovering his
enemy should he suffer such pains for which he can in no wise account.
Happier still is he who gives no provocation for the use of this deadly
and secret means of vengeance.

Images were sometimes made of brass or the dust of a dead man, as well
as of wax. The limbs were often interchanged and inverted, a hand
being in place of a foot, and _vice versâ_. The head was also turned
backwards. The worst kind was given the form of a man with a certain
name--Wierus hesitates to give it--written above the head and the magic
words, "Alif, lafeil, Zazahit mel meltat leuatam leutare," then it
should be buried in a sepulchre.

Reginald Scot gives the following variation:--

 Make an image in his name whom you would hurt or kill, of new virgine
 wax; under the right arme poke whereof a swallowes hart, and the
 liver under the left; then hang about the neck thereof a new thread
 in a new needle, pricked into the member which you would have hurt,
 with the rehearsalle of certain words (which for the avoiding of
 superstition are omitted).

This was probably taken straight from Wierus' book, with which it
corresponds almost exactly, and the following instructions are, with
some changes in the magic words, identical with those given above. This
does not, however, by any means exhaust Wierus' list, as will be seen
by the following:--

 Take two images, one of wax and the other of the dust of a dead man.
 Put an iron, which could cause the death of a man, into the hand of
 one of the figures, so that it may pierce the head of the image which
 represents the person whose death you desire.

Charms for taciturnity under torture, or against feeling the pangs of
torture itself, were obviously very freely bestowed by Satan upon his
servants. As an enlightened and advanced thinker Wierus remarks that
the merit of the spells does not lie in the words which compose them,
but is merely a piece of Devil's work. One of these spells against the
torture runs thus:--

 To three unequal branches, three bodies are hung, Dismas, Gestas, et
 Divina potestas, which is in the middle. Dismas is condemned, and
 Gestas has flown to Heaven.

Scot's version of this is:--

 Three bodies on a bough doo hang,
 For merits of inequalitie.
 Dismas and Gestas, in the midst
 The power of the Divinitie.
 Dismas is damned, but Gestas lifted up
 Above the starres on hie.

Paul Grilland, a jurisconsult, tells a story of a thief who had
concealed in his hair a little paper on which he had written, "+ Jesus
autem + transiens + per medium illorum ibat + os non comminuitis ex eo
+." He was marked with the cross, and was thus immune from torture.

Much of this is, of course, mere gibberish, in which the original idea
may or may not be traceable. The divorce of the sense from the words
gradually led people to believe that the words themselves contained
peculiar merit, and that absurd reiteration of meaningless sounds
sufficed to give them their heart's desire. This attitude accounts, of
course, for the many spells which recall the patter song in character.
Their main feature consists in the repetition or rhyming of certain
syllables, as in the cure of toothache, "Galbas galbat, galdes,
galdat"; or against mad-dog bite, "Irioni Khiriori effera Kuder fere."
This characteristic doubtless made them easy to remember, while the
confusion of meaning no doubt added to their value in the eyes of the
faithful. Witches, too, were probably as susceptible to the fascination
of jingle and alliteration as is the poet of to-day.

It will have been noticed that religion and magic are curiously mingled
in many of the spells--Wierus, indeed, states specially that numbers
of those given by him were taken secretly from the book of a priest.
By degrees, however, they became so much used and altered that the
witch herself might frequently use spells which had originally been
formulated by the Church. There are, of course, spells against the
witch herself. A preventive against witchcraft was to carry a Bible
or Prayer-book; mistletoe, four-leaved clover, and a rowan that is
found growing out of the top of another tree, are esteemed exceedingly
effective. In Mecklenburg, herbs which protect people against witches
are gathered on mid-summer night. "If you wish to hang a witch by
the hair," says Wierus, "take an effigy made of the dust of a dead
man's head, and baptise it by the name of the person you wish to
hang, perfume it with an evil-smelling bone, and read backwards the
words:--'Domine, dominus noster; dominus illuminatio mea; domine exaudi
orationem meam; Deus laudem meam ne tacueris.' Then bury it in two
different places." If you meet a witch you should take the wall of her
in town or street, and the right hand of her in lane or field, and when
passing you should clench both hands, doubling the thumbs beneath the
fingers. Salute her civilly before she speaks to you, and on no account
take any present from her. Finally, the dried muzzle of a wolf is
recommended by Pliny as efficacious against enchantments.

Certain stones and vegetables were part of the stock-in-trade of the
witch or wizard. The power of mandragore as a philtre was unequalled;
cinque-foil was used for purification; while olive branches are so
pure that if planted by a rake they will be barren or die. Jasper is
powerful against apparitions, and coral, worn by infants or mounted in
bracelets, protects against charms. Perfume made of peewits' feathers
drives away phantoms; antirrhinum worn in a bracelet ensures against
poison; a lemon stuck full of gaily-coloured pins, amongst which are no
black ones, brings good luck; while the horseshoe has long been used
for the same purpose. Against chafing of the thigh while riding Pliny
recommends that a sprig of poplar should be carried in the hand.

On the whole, the means of enchantment were very easily procured,
and they were generally most efficacious when most nasty. While some
of them, such as hellebore, which secured beneficial rest, had real
medicinal value, others were adopted for some trivial reason of growth,
form, or time of year. As much stress was laid on the words that
accompanied them as on a doctor's prescription, and the strength of
the appeal to the imagination was only equalled by the openness of the
imagination to that appeal.

One other point is to be remembered ere we close the chapter: that
these charms and philtres very often served their purpose. Though
there may have been little value for thief taking in the monotonous
repetition of a meaningless jingle, it by no means follows that it
would be equally useless in the cure of, say, toothache. Only get
your patient to believe, or believe yourself, that the pain is on
the point of vanishing and--but are not Faith Healers and Christian
Scientists a power in the land to-day. So, again, if a young woman
should get to hear that a young man was so impressed by her charms as
to seek diabolical assistance in gaining her smiles, he would in all
probability assume a position in her thoughts more prominent than that
held by his rivals--with a possible sequel in matrimony. Let us laugh
at the folly of our forefathers by all means--no doubt they set us the
example--but it does not therefore follow that our means to an end are
always the more efficacious through being presumably more sensible.




CHAPTER XV

THE WITCH IN FICTION


To those who deny the existence of the witch in fact, any mention
of the witch in fiction as a separate entity may seem superfluous.
Nevertheless even the enlightened must admit a distinction between
the witch as she appeared to Bodin or Pierre de Lancre and the "very
repulsive-looking old witch whose underlip hung down to her chin" of
Hans Andersen's "Tinder-box." Indeed, this latter can scarcely be
considered a witch at all in the true sense of the word, seeing that
despite her underlip she seems to have had no occult powers of her own,
except, indeed, that her checked apron had the faculty of quieting
savage dogs. For the rest, though, she seems to have been entirely
dependent upon the old tinder-box left by her grandmother underground,
and of which she sent the soldier in search. The only detail, indeed,
wherein she resembled the more orthodox witch of history was that when
the soldier cut off her head without any provocation whatever, he not
only incurred no blame, but even thereby paved his way to marrying
a king's daughter--a moral such as would certainly have appealed
to Mathew Hopkins. Again, the wicked stepmother of "Snow-white" in
Grimm's story of that name, although regarded as a witch and in the
end suffering appropriate punishment for her crimes, has no more claim
to take her place beside Circe or Mother Damnable in the pages of
history than is due to the apparently fortuitous possession of a magic
looking-glass and some knowledge of toxicology.

The witch in fiction might serve a more serious purpose than does
the heroine of a problem novel, for not only has the perusal of her
incredible pranks served to enlighten many a weary hour; she is also a
standing proof of the _bona fides_ of the real personage upon whom she
is based. Just as in fiction, dealing with less recondite characters,
we find that their doings are for the most part exaggerated caricatures
of the happenings of every-day life in the real world, and that their
potentialities of action are limited, not by hard fact, but only by
the furthest bounds of the novelist's imagination, so the witch of
fiction caricatures her historical prototype to the point of verging
on the incredible. For your real witch, whether she be Diana or Mother
Demdyke, Joan of Arc, or the Witch of Endor, has always--like less
gifted human beings--conformed to one of several types, varying from
them only in the degree proper to human nature. Whether young and
beautiful, or old and repulsive, whether hag or heroine, goddess or
gude-wife, she remains constant to her type, and has done so from the
beginning of things. The witch of fiction, on the other hand, like the
problematic heroine, doth as her creator wishes in defiance of all
laws of possibility. As any inquisitor could tell you, in a court of
justice, once a witch always a witch; in the pages of Grimm a witch is
quite as likely to be a fairy godmother or a benevolent old lady, with
a magic golden apple, or, for that matter, a benevolent old lady pure
and simple. Sometimes, it is true, as with characters in a realistic
novel, the witch of fiction may pass for an impressionistic study of
the real witch. Thus in the famous story of Hänsel and Gretel she is
so far realistic as to desire the capture of small children. But,
instead of acting thus in the service and for the honour of her master
the Devil, she is moved by no nobler impulse than the desire to eat
them, and thus shows herself not a witch at all--for your true witch is
always altruistic--nothing better, indeed, than a greedy old cannibal.
Her methods, again, however creditable to their inventor, are by no
means such as would have commended themselves to the economical tastes
of her Satanic employer. The real witch was never yet provided with the
capital necessary to build herself houses of "sugar and spice and all
that's nice" either as residence or decoy. She lived notoriously in
hovels--unless, indeed, she had private means--and the profits of her
infernal bargain, even when she received them, were never sufficient
to provide her with more than the barest living. Grimm's cannibal,
with her roof of chocolate and walls of marzipan, might have been a
sorceress; she certainly was no witch.

More realistic, and thus all the more misleading, are the weird
sisters in Macbeth. Did we take them as representative types of
witchdom, we should be as much deceived as were he who, reading
nothing but newspapers, believed that English life was made up of
murders, divorces, political speeches and judicial witticisms. They
give us, indeed, an excellent impressionist idea of the witch as she
appeared in the public eye, some valuable recipes for potions, apt
illustrations of divinatory methods and so forth, but no suggestion
whatever of that quiet home life wherein the witch, like the British
public, passed most of her existence. No doubt she occasionally took
part in social reunions, in caverns or on blasted heaths, with Hecate
as the guest of the evening; no doubt she there interchanged ideas as
to the surest means of drowning sailors or ruining kingdoms. But these
were only paragraphs in the story of her life, very much as being
tried for murder or presented at Court are outstanding incidents in
the life-story of the average Briton. For the most part, she spent
her time in the quiet seclusion of her hovel, adding to her stock of
every-day poisons or giving interviews to the local peasantry. Of this
Shakespeare tells us nothing; to judge from the witches in Macbeth they
might have spent the whole of their time waiting about on Scottish
moorlands on the chance of making history.

Much nearer to the truth are the lives of Mother Demdyke, Mother
Chattox, and the rest of the "Lancashire Witches," as portrayed for
us by Harrison Ainsworth. It is true that for purposes of dramatic
effect the author exaggerates their characteristics; but such is
the privilege of the historical novelist. Nobody supposes--or is
expected to suppose--that the Queen Elizabeth of "The Faërie Queene"
or the Richelieu of "Les Trois Mousquetaires" corresponds in every
respect to the historical personages for whom they stand. In real life
Queen Elizabeth was probably insufferable, vain, ugly, with the bad
temper that comes from biliousness founded on a _régime_ of beer and
beefsteak for breakfast; Richelieu an imposing figure only because he
was successful. But nobody would think of blaming Spenser or Dumas
for having built up an heroic edifice upon a mediocre foundation;
had they told us no more than the bare truth, they would certainly
have been accused of falsifying history, and, with more justice, of
lack of literary artistry. The mission of the historical novelist, as
generally understood, at any rate, is, like that of the scene-painter,
to provide us with the appropriate setting for figures bathed in
conventional limelight. If he draws things as they were he fails in
his duty towards people as they are. So it is with the Mother Demdyke
of Ainsworth's imagining. The limelight is upon her all the time. She
is condemned to be theatrical, if she is to be real; her destinies
must be interwoven with those of dispossessed abbots, of aristocratic
heroes, and of beautiful ill-used heroines. When composing a curse,
she must never forget what is expected of her by the world beyond the
footlights; when she interviews her master the Devil, such an interview
must always be melodramatic. In actual fact, we know that when the
Devil had occasion to visit Lancashire in order to discuss business
projects with Mother Demdyke, he did so briefly and without waste of
words, for the Devil is above all else a man of business. We know, too,
that the real Mother Demdyke was never able to do mischief on such an
heroic scale as her bioscopic reflection in the novel. At least, if we
make full allowance for her creator's necessities, we may admit that he
has given us a sufficiently fair picture, if not of Mother Demdyke as
she was, at least of what she was supposed to be.

Of a different order of realism is the witch-world described for us
by Goethe. Here, again, had we no further knowledge of witchdom,
we should be sadly led astray, though naturally and inevitably. For
Goethe, though he gives us some vivid sketches of witch-life, uses
them only incidentally. His witches have no greater purpose than to
form a background against which the figures of Mephistopheles and
Faust may be the better shown up--nay, more, his witches are but part
of that background, phantasmagorically confused with Menelaus, Paris,
Oberon, Ariel, Titania, and a hundred other figures of mythology or
fairy-lore. It is true that by moments he gives us studies of the witch
as a personal entity, as, for instance, when Faust and his mentor visit
the Witch Kitchen, there to interview not only a very witch, but with
her a miscellaneous collection of her familiars, cats, kittens, and
the like. It may be noted as a subtle touch of realism that the witch
does not at first recognise her master owing to his temporary lack of
a cloven hoof and attendant ravens, cursing him roundly before she
realises the mistake. But in this the poet overdoes his realism, seeing
that in real life the witch had so many opportunities of meeting Satan
in unexpected forms, as a tree-trunk, a brazen bull, or a greyhound,
that any minor modification of his anatomy would certainly not have
caused any such mystification. Even in the original, then, we have to
make great allowances for poetical or other licence before we can admit
that the witches of Faust are at all true to life. When we come to
the acting editions of the play as performed in England by ambitious
actor-managers, we find that the unfortunate witch becomes little
more than a caricature. On the Brocken she is elbowed out of place by
miscellaneous mythologicals, so that the audience gains no truer idea
of an ordinary Sabbath than does the visitor of London who only sees
it on a Bank-holiday. In the Witch-kitchen scene again, not only is
she quite lost in a world of red fire and scenic effects, but she is
represented as resembling rather the pantaloon in a pantomime than a
junior partner of the Devil. At least the witch has so much cause of
gratitude to the poet, that he and his imitators have given her a new,
even if rather meretricious, popularity at a period when it is badly
needed.

Properly to appreciate the difference between the witch of fiction
and her prototype in real life, we must seek her in what is, after
all, her stronghold, the fairy-story. It would seem, indeed, as if,
having been driven to take refuge in the nursery, she has there caught
something of the vitality of its more familiar occupants. For just as
we find that the real witch has more than one seeming, so the witch of
fiction may belong to any of many types--if not to several of them at
once. As already noticed, she makes a habit of exceeding the bounds of
possibility; she is also as frequently as not a dual personality. In
real life the witch is always the witch first, the queen, or duchess,
or gude-wife only incidentally. Were it not for her occult powers she
would cease to exist, would be degraded, indeed, to the ordinary level
of queen or beldame. But in fiction, and especially in fairy fiction,
this does not hold good; that is to say, there are certain ranks and
positions which carry with them almost of right the being considered
a witch. Thus if you happen to marry a king, who has a beautiful
daughter, or a particularly eligible son, it is almost a foregone
conclusion that you are a witch; this, not because widowed monarchs
are particularly given to making bad marriages, but rather, it would
seem, on some such principle as that by which the wife of the Egyptian
Pharaoh became a goddess by marriage. It is true that to be a witch
in fairy-land, you need not have entered into any agreement with the
Devil, nor possess any supernatural power whatever. As in the already
quoted story of the Tinder-box, the possession of any magic article
sufficiently bewitched to do mischief is all that you require. You need
not have bewitched it yourself, in many cases you have inherited, in
others purchased it, in others had it thrust upon you. You need not,
again, be ugly; in most cases you cannot be, for no one can suppose
that a royal widower would feel himself called upon to mate with a hag
_en secondes noces_. Sometimes, of course, you may only assume an
attractive appearance for the purpose of catching your monarch, but
this is rare. The stepmother witch in "Snow-white," for example, we
know to have been beautiful on the authority of her magic mirror, for
did it not in reply to her queries tell her before the irruption of
Snow-white that she was the fairest woman in the world? Nor have we any
cause to doubt that the mirror was truthful, seeing that it sacrificed
both expediency and politeness to veracity by maintaining later that
"Snow-white is fairest now, I ween."

It is impossible not to feel a certain sympathy with this unfortunate
royal lady in her subsequent fate, that of being condemned to dance
herself to death in red-hot iron shoes; seeing that the sin of envy,
for which she suffered, was entailed upon her by all the conventions of
stepmother-hood, and that, had she failed in it, the story could never
have been written.

That the stepmother witch might and frequently did possess magical
powers on her own account we may learn from the story of "The Wild
Swans," as related by Hans Andersen. In that instance the wicked queen,
by merely making a pass in the air, is able to turn her eleven stepsons
into wild swans as easily as Circe herself turned the companions of
Ulysses into swine. Strictly following earthly precedent again, we
find that her spells sometimes fail, as when she bids her familiars,
three toads, place themselves upon Eliza's head, forehead, and heart,
so that she may become as stupid, as ugly, and as evilly inclined as
themselves. In this they fail altogether, being unable to make headway
against the virtuous innocence of Eliza, very much, as upon earth, all
evil spells were rendered impotent when confronted with holy words or
the sign of the cross. She does not, it may be noted, disdain such
more commonplace methods of annoyance, as anointing her stepdaughter's
face with walnut-juice and driving her from home. Yet another point in
which the story of "The Wild Swans" shows itself in accordance with
the traditions of the real witch-world is where the good princess, now
become queen, being accused of consorting with witches in a churchyard,
is herself accused of witchcraft by the local archbishop, and would
inevitably have been burnt but for the timely intervention of her
brothers. It was fortunate for her that she lived in fairy-land and not
under the jurisdiction of Innocent VIII. or James I., when it is much
to be feared that a whole army of brothers would not have sufficed to
save her--as a matter of fact they would probably have been among her
warmest accusers. This the more so, that she was attended in prison by
three familiars in the shape of mice, who would certainly have provided
damning evidence in the eyes of any self-respecting inquisitor.

In seeking for the witch in fairy-land, we must often look for her
under some other name--as a fairy, for instance, and especially as
a fairy-godmother. One of the most embarrassing attributes of the
fairy-godmother is that if you offend her she at once changes into a
witch, without giving you any warning whatever. She may have officiated
as godmother to half a dozen of your children, treating them always as
a real fairy should. But should you once offend her, and especially
should you forget to invite her to a christening, she at once becomes
a witch of the utmost malignancy. This is a curious perversion from
the habits of the real witch, whose interests are entirely against
the baptising of children under any circumstances. It may be supposed
that, having for the nonce laid aside her evil doing, and adopted the
civilised veneer of fairyism, she is quick to take offence at any
implied non-recognition thereof, very much as might a black man if
anyone said to him, "I suppose you don't wear trousers at home?" A
famous example of the beneficent fairy godmother occurs, of course, in
"Cinderella"; a cynic might, indeed, argue that her beneficence towards
Cinderella, her provision of fine dresses, six-horse coaches, and glass
slippers, were induced rather by the desire to spite the ugly sisters
than out of any actual love of Cinderella herself. Another common type
of the double-edged godmother occurs in the story of Prince Hazel
and Prince Fair. With characteristic perversity, while pretending
that each prince will have an equal chance, she yet makes everything
smooth for the one, while placing irresistible temptation in the path
of the other, basing her action upon her preconceived idea of their
disposition.

The witch-fairy need not be a godmother. In the "Sleeping Beauty,"
for instance, her sole cause of irritation is at not receiving an
invitation to the christening. In consequence, as every child knows,
she condemns the future Beauty to prick her finger at the age of
fifteen and thereafter to fall asleep--she and all her entourage--until
a casual prince shall have sufficient curiosity to make his way through
the surrounding thorn-thickets. It may be noted in this connection that
the every-day inhabitants of fairy-land have never shown themselves
able to learn from experience. Scarcely a royal christening could take
place without some important witch-fairy being forgotten, always with
disastrous results, yet no steps seem ever to have been taken to guard
against the recurrence of such disastrous negligence.

The witch-princess differs from the witch-queen stepmother in that
she is usually herself under a spell, which, being removed, usually
by the intervention of some adventurous lover, she at once resumes
all the lovable qualities inherent to beautiful princesses. Thus, in
"The Travelling Companion," the princess is at first made to appear
in the most unamiable light possible, though her beauty and her mantle
of butterflies' wings none the less turn the heads of the wooers whose
skulls are destined to adorn her garden--a phenomenon not unknown on
solid earth. Nevertheless, when a suitor arrives with the necessary
qualifications to overcome the spell, she settles down to a life of the
domestic virtues, perhaps on the principle that the reformed rake makes
the best husband. The witch-princess, be it noted, is so far of earthly
origin as to be directly descended from that unhappy heroine, Medea.

I have hitherto refrained from reference to what are perhaps the most
vividly convincing characters in witch-fiction: "Sidonia the Sorceress"
and "The Amber Witch," the creations of the German Lutheran clergyman,
Wilhelm Meinhold. They can, however, more especially the "Amber Witch,"
scarcely be regarded as absolute fiction, seeing that they provide not
imaginary portraits, but actual photographs of the witch as she was
supposed to live. So carefully did the author collate his facts, so
exact to truth were the details of the trial, tribulations, and final
escape of the unhappy girl suspected of witchcraft, that at the time of
its publication in 1843, "The Amber Witch" was generally accepted as an
actual record of a witchcraft trial in the time of the Thirty Years'
War. Perhaps, indeed, Maria Schweidler deserves a better fate than
to be included as a witch under any heading whatever, seeing that not
only was her innocence finally made manifest, but that the accusation
was originally aroused against her for no better cause than her own
kindness of heart and practical benevolence. It is true that many of
the names enshrined in the annals of witchcraft would never have been
there if guilt or malevolence were the sole rightful claims to this
form of immortality.

As might be expected, the wizard, no less than the witch, has
appealed to the picturesque imagination of the romancist in many
times and countries. What is more, he has, if anything, been taken
more seriously. This is perhaps due to the fact that his creator has
generally conformed more closely to his original. The great alchemists
of history have been pressed into the service of many writers,
much as have the Rosicrucians, the Cabalists, and other members of
magico-secret societies. Even when we find the wizard, magician, or
sorcerer in his purely romantic guise, he conforms more closely to his
original than does the witch. In the "Arabian Nights," for example,
are many magicians, to say nothing of djinns, but there is scarcely
one among them who transcends the powers of his real-life prototype.
Merlin, again, despite his ambiguous origins, wherever he appears,
whether in Arthurian legend or Maeterlinckian variation, is always
recognisable and true to type. Prospero, in the "Tempest," is a
magician of no mean power, but he is none the less a man with human
affections and human aims, taking the side of good in the age-long
struggle against evil, as represented by Caliban. No one meeting
Prospero in the society of, let us say, Albertus Magnus, need have
found anything to cavil at in his verisimilitude. Even when you find
a magician in fairy-lore, as in the already quoted story of "The
Travelling Companion," he is, if unamiable, not unreal, unless, indeed,
in his preference for cushions made of live mice, eating each others'
tails.

Thus in fiction, as in fact, we find the caste distinction between
the witch and the wizard rigidly observed, the one approached with
something like reverence, the other regarded with dislike and
half-contemptuous fear. This may be largely due in both worlds to the
fact that there are "to ten thousand witches but one wizard," and
that familiarity breeds contempt. Nevertheless, it should serve but
as another claim upon our sympathy for the much-abused witch, even
while it exemplifies the truth of the proverb that nothing succeeds
like success. The magician, after having led the Devil by the nose
throughout a long and ill-spent life, not only succeeds nine times out
of ten in cheating him in the end, but also preserves to a remarkable
degree the sympathies of mankind, whether as devotee or novel-reader.
The unfortunate witch, having devoted her industrious days to carrying
out faithfully the terms of her bargain, is condemned to the flames
both in this world and the next amid universal execration. Truly he
does not always bear the palm who best merits it.




CHAPTER XVI

SOME WITCHES OF TO-DAY


No study of witchcraft--however slight--could be considered complete
did it ignore its importance in the world of to-day. Dispossessed
though she may be, in a small intellectual district of the Western
World, the witch still queens it over the imagination of the vast
majority of mankind. What is more, as I have tried to show in an
earlier chapter, there are many indications that her reconquest of
her lost territories cannot be long delayed. With the close of the
nineteenth century--in which the cult of neo-materialism reached its
widest sway--the reaction against the great conspiracy may already
have begun. The Russo-Japanese war, with its defeat of an Occidental,
or semi-Occidental, Power at the hands of the Orient, may also be
held to typify the approaching victory of witchcraft over science.
It is true that the true Russian--the moujik, as apart from the
germanised, official class-has always preserved his faith in magic;
true also that the Japanese victories were won by a free adaptation of
European methods. But this can only obscure, without changing, the
great underlying phenomenon--that the lethargic East, the great home
of witchcraft and witch-lore, has at last aroused itself from its long
trance, and, by whatever methods chastised the fussy West that sought,
professedly for its own good, to change its lotus-dreams to nightmares.
It only remains for China to rise up and chastise the inconstant
Japanese for their treachery to a common ideal, to make the certainty
of the witch's victory more certain.

The position of the witch is, indeed, unassailable. Whatever the
result of the racial Armageddon of to-morrow, she can lose nothing.
If white civilisation stand the test of battle, she is in no worse
position than before; if it go down before the hosts of Asia, the
witch and her devotees will reap the fruits of victory. It may suit
the present Asiatic purpose to drape its limbs with tawdry European
vestments--but the patent-leather boots worn by the Babu cannot make an
Englishman of him. He may be a "failed B.A. of Allahabad University," a
persistent office-seeker, a bomb-throwing Revolutionist and a professed
Atheist, but he is none the less a believer in a million gods and ten
times as many witches. In his native village he has an hereditary
official magician, who controls the weather, wards off evil spells,
performs incantations and the like at fixed charges--and commands the
implicit confidence of educated and uneducated alike. What is more,
the Indian cult of witchcraft has flourished the more widely beneath
the contemptuous protection of the British Raj. In the old times there
were certain inconveniences attendant upon the witch or wizard-life
in India as elsewhere. Dreaded they were, as they are still, but
there were times when an outraged community turned under the pressure
of their malignant spells and meted out appropriate punishment full
measure. Witch-tests very similar to those employed by Matthew Hopkins
were everywhere in use. Among the Bhils, for example, and other allied
tribes, a form of "swimming" prevailed, in many ways an improvement
upon the fallible British methods. A stake being set up in a shallow
tank or lake, so that it protrudes above the surface, the suspected
witch must lay hold of it and descend to the bottom, there to remain
while an arrow is shot from a bow and brought back by a runner to the
firing-place. If the suspect can remain under water until then, she is
declared innocent; if she rises to breathe, she is a confessed witch.
This method offers so many opportunities of manipulation, either by the
suspect's friends or enemies, that it may well take precedence even of
the ordeal by fire, water, or ploughshare favoured among us in feudal
days, while the inventiveness of the English witch-finder is put to
open shame. Needless to say, Indian witchcraft had and has all the
material incidentals proper to a cult. There are substances susceptible
to spells, much as is the case with electricity; there are others, as,
for example, the boughs of the castor-oil plant, very effective in its
cure--so that to flog a witch with such rods is the best possible way
of rendering her harmless. There are proper ways of punishing her, too,
as, for example, to rub red pepper into her eyes. But unfortunately for
those susceptible to spells, the British Government has now stepped in
to protect, not the persecuted ryot, but the witch who persecutes him.
It is a crime to destroy, even to torture, a witch, however notorious;
and however strongly we may object to such iniquitous laws, it is
advisable to obey them, or to break them only very secretly indeed.
Owing to this unfortunate state of things, the witch riots unchecked
throughout Hindustan, and everywhere increases in importance. For, if
you are forbidden to suppress her, the only alternative is to seek
her favour, and if you have offended to appease her with gifts, or
pay some rival practitioner to weave yet more potent counter-spells.
Otherwise the odds are heavy that sooner or later, as you are returning
home through the jungle one day, she will lie in wait for you in the
disguise of a poisonous snake or man-eating tiger, or, failing that,
that you will die miserably of typhoid fever or plague.

The witch of Hindustan, though somewhat exalted in importance by the
protection extended to her by the British Government, differs but
little from her sisters in other parts of the Orient, in the Nearer
East, in Further India, China, even in enlightened Japan. Everywhere,
indeed, where any regularised form of religion exists, you may find her
actively protesting against its decrees, catering for its unsatisfied
devotees, or those who agree with that old woman who, discovered
offering up prayer to the Devil, explained that at her time of life
she thought it well to be in with both sides. Sometimes she takes
the place of the Devil; sometimes she provides a way of escape from
heavenly and infernal powers alike; sometimes she embodies the whole of
the supernatural. The creed of the African native, by him transported
to the Americas, may be described as devil-worship--but more properly
as witchcraft pure and simple. The African witch-doctor, as with the
majority of savage tribes, is himself a god, far more powerful than the
devilkins whose destinies he directs. More powerful than the European
magician of old times, he can command Heaven as well as Hell--and
whether by election, assumption, or descent, he is the sole arbiter of
fate, even though, perhaps out of deference to infiltrated European
ideas, he sometimes professes to act only as the mouthpiece of Destiny.

I have already referred to the persistence of the belief in witches in
our own and other European countries. Further examples might be quoted,
almost _ad infinitum_, all going to prove the same thing, that the
elementary school is powerless against the inherited tradition. Those
interested may find a striking example of belief in witchcraft and the
power of the evil eye in Somerset, including an incantation of some
merit, the whole too long for quotation, in "Somerset and Dorset Notes
and Queries" for December, 1894. Or again, in "La Mala Vita a Roma," by
Signori Niceforo and Sighele, a chapter is devoted to the present-day
witches of the Eternal City, showing conclusively that, among a host of
fortune-tellers and similar swindlers, the genuine "strege" flourish as
of yore, though they are perhaps less easily to be found by strangers
in search of them. Instead, however, of quoting further from the
experiences of others, I may adduce one or two instances of witches
with whom I have personally come in contact. I must admit that, as
providing any test of the _bona fides_ of the modern witch, they are
singularly unconvincing. They may, however, serve as some proof, not
only that the witch can still find many to do her reverence in modern
Christian Europe, but that, as a profession for women, that of the
witch is not without its potentialities in these overcrowded days.

If you cross over the Ponte Vecchio at Florence and, leaving the Via
dei Bardi on your left, continue along the Via Porta Romana for about
two hundred yards before turning sharply to the right, you will be
following a course which has been often trodden by those in search of
respite from witch-harrying. If you wish actually to consult the witch
you must persevere yet further, through a maze of rather mouldering
streets, until you come to a very tall house, painted a pale maroon
colour and pock-marked with brown stains where rain has eaten into
the plaster. You may recognise the house by the fact that it has two
sham windows frescoed on its side wall--it stands at a corner of two
malodorous lanes--and that one of them purports to be occupied by a
lady who is smiling at you invitingly. Smiled, I should say, for even
at the time of my last visit, two years ago, she was fading into the
plaster background, and by now she may have disappeared altogether
or have been replaced by a scowling gentleman, for all I know to the
contrary. I would not swear, for that matter, that even the house still
stands where it did, so quick is the march of modern improvement in
New Italy. But granted that you find the lane and the house and the
painted lady, granted further that Emilia has not changed her address,
you may be sure of speaking with a witch whose fame has permeated a
considerable portion of Tuscany. You will have to climb a wearisome
distance up some incredibly dirty and unpleasantly-smelling stairs to
reach her first, though, and it is possible that even then you may have
to wait until she has settled the destiny or cured the ills of some
client from a distant village. But having overcome all difficulties,
you may count upon a not unamiable reception from a stout, elderly
woman with a good-humoured eye and a plentiful crop of glossy black
hair turning slightly to grey. She will not be at all puffed up by
her powers or position, and she will be quite ready to accept any
little token of appreciative regard you may be inclined to press upon
her; but, to be quite candid, I doubt if you will leave her apartment
knowing much more of witchcraft after the modern Italian convention
than when you entered it. This partly from a certain diffidence on
her part to give away trade secrets, but still more because Emilia's
Italian is several shades worse than your own, so that unless you are
an amateur in Tuscan also, you will find her altogether unintelligible.
Only, if you should prove able to interchange ideas, you must by all
means ask her about the Old Religion, how far it still prevails among
the Apennines, what are its gods, and what their powers. If, further,
you ask her opinion as to the magical powers of certain Christian
saints, and especially of Saint Anthony, you will be amply repaid,
supposing you to be interested in such matters, for all the trouble you
and your nose have been put to in discovering Emilia's abiding-place.

My acquaintance with Emilia commenced in a certain hill-top village
within easy walking distance of Florence. I was there honoured by some
slight intimacy with a worthy contadine who had one fair daughter,
by name Zita. Having a lustrous eye, a praiseworthy figure, and a
neat ankle, she had also a sufficiency of admirers, whose fervour was
not the less that she was generally regarded as likely to receive an
acceptable marriage-portion, as such things go thereabouts. Nor was
Zita at all averse to admiration, accepting all that was offered with
admirable resignation. Had Zita happened to be the only young woman in
the village desirous of admiration I might never have become acquainted
with Emilia. As things were, Zita was one day attacked by an illness
and took to her bed. There was no apparent cause, and dark whispers
began to go abroad of jealousies, witchcraft, and what not. Their
justice was proved within three days by the discovery, in Zita's bed,
of an ear of grass, two hen's feathers, and a twig tied together by a
strand of horsehair. The whole had been neatly tucked away beneath the
mattress, where it might have remained undiscovered in a less cleanly
household than was the Morettis'. Doubt was at an end--obviously Zita
was bewitched, and the worst must be feared unless the spell could be
expeditiously removed.

In my ignorance I supposed that the local priest would be the
proper person to apply to in such a difficulty. But I was very soon
convinced of my mistake. To marry you, usher you into or out of the
world, the reverend gentleman may have his uses. But to ward off
the ills of witchcraft his ministrations are worse than useless,
seeing that they only serve to irritate the demons and thus make the
patient's sufferings more intense. All this provided, of course,
that he be not himself a stregone, a state of things more common
than might be supposed. But just as the priest is the one genuine
authority on Heaven, Purgatory, and the simpler issues of Hell, so, to
grapple with witchcraft, no one is so capable as a witch. And of all
available witches none was so efficient or, be it added, so moderate
in her charges as Emilia. She was, in fact, the family-witch of the
Moretti family, frequently called in and as frequently being entirely
successful in her treatment. She was, for that matter, long since
become a valued family friend, and--in fact, Emilia must be called
in without delay. I accompanied Zita's elder brother Luigi when he
visited Florence for the purpose, and with him and Emilia returned,
travelling part of the way by electric tramcar, the conductor being, as
it chanced, an acquaintance of my companions, and, as such, chatting
pleasantly with Emilia concerning her profession, contrasting it
favourably with his own. Exactly what counter-charms she used in
Zita's treatment I was not privileged to know; at least, I can testify
that they were entirely successful, and that within a very short time
Zita was herself again, breaking her usual quantity of hearts round and
about the village well, and openly jeering at the rival beauty to whom
she attributed her indisposition, for the ill-success that had attended
her. If I cannot claim that through Zita's bewitching and its cure I
gained much knowledge of Italian witchcraft as presently understood,
I may at least instance it as an example of the matter-of-fact way
in which its existence is accepted by the modern Tuscan peasant. He
regards it indeed with as little, or less, perturbation as the coming
of the motor-car. Just as the motor has become a danger on every road,
so the evil spirit throngs every field. You may take precautions
against him and the ill-deeds done by him at the witch's bidding--just
as you look carefully round before crossing a road nowadays--you
may string bells or weave feathers on your horse's head-dress as
preventatives, or make the requisite sign whenever you have reason to
believe yourself within the radius of an evil eye; but accidents will
happen--and it is always well to know the address of such a dependable
practitioner as Emilia, in case. For that matter, you may sometimes
desire to have a spell cast on your own account--it is difficult to
go through life without a quarrel or two--and in that case also
Emilia----But I am becoming indiscreet.

Another witch with whom I have had personal dealings lives--or did
live, for she was reported to be more than one hundred years of age at
the time--in a small town, locally termed a city, in North Carolina. I
must frankly admit that I learned even less of magical knowledge from
her than from her Italian colleague. She was a negress, and having
heard of her existence from the coloured coachman of the friend in
whose house I was staying, I determined to leave no stone unturned to
make her acquaintance. I hoped to glean from her lips some particulars
of the extent to which Voodooism--elsewhere referred to in this
volume--is still practised by the American negro--a fact of which I was
repeatedly assured by Southern friends. I was signally disappointed;
the old lady would not, in fact, condescend so much as to open her
lips to me at all. She lived with her son, who held a position of
some trust in connection with the Coloured Baptist Church, in one of
the wooden shanties which make up the Coloured town. They stand at
some little distance from the august quarters inhabited by the white
gentry, and the approach is rendered almost impossible upon a wet day
by oceans of brick-red mud of incredible prehensibility. The old lady
I found crouching over a fire in approved witch-fashion, her attention
entirely devoted to the contents of a pot set upon the hob. However it
might suggest a magical brew, it consisted in actual fact of broiling
chickens, very savoury to the smell and speaking well for the worldly
prosperity of Coloured Baptist office-holders. So concentrated were
her few remaining senses thereon, to the exclusion of all else, that
although her son supplemented my own efforts and those of my guide
in endeavouring to attract her attention, she would not so much as
turn her be-handkerchiefed head in my direction. So concerned was the
deacon--if that were his actual rank--at his mother's neglect, that
I was driven to console him by accepting him as guide through the
beauties of the Coloured cemetery near by. It is true that the cemetery
was not without its human--its pathetically human--interest, the grave
of each child being watched over by the humble toys it had played with
in its lifetime, and those of adults by the medicine-bottles, even down
to the last, half-emptied, made use of in their illness--this tribute
being intended as mute testimony to the care expended upon them. But it
could not console me for the lost opportunity. Nevertheless I can vouch
for it that the old lady was a witch, and of no small eminence, for her
son told me so himself, instancing examples of her power, and he was a
very good Christian.

Less elusive, although in some respects scarcely more enlightening,
was an interview I once had with a middle-aged witch of unpleasing
exterior in the kitchen of the suburban house tenanted by a relative.
To the practice of witchcraft this example added the collecting of old
bottles and kitchen refuse as a means of livelihood, and she lived, as
the police afterwards informed us, in a caravan temporarily moored on
a piece of waste land in the neighbourhood of Hammersmith Broadway.
The mistress of the house, having occasion to enter the kitchen,
there found her seated at the table, unravelling the mysteries of
Fate to the cook and scullery-maid by the aid of a very greasy pack
of playing-cards. Whatever her pretensions to knowledge of the lower
world, she had obviously been drinking--so much so, indeed, that I was
called upon for aid in ejecting her from the premises. A large woman,
of determined aspect and an aggressive tongue, this might have proved
a task of some difficulty had I not luckily bethought me of adjuring
her in German, before which she slowly retreated, cursing volubly in
English the while, until she had reached the area-steps, when we were
able to lock the back door upon her and so be rid of her. It appeared
on subsequent inquiry that she had obtained sums amounting in all to
some 17s. 6d. from among the domestics, the greater part being the
price of informing the aforesaid scullery-maid that her young man, then
serving his country in India, still remained faithful to her memory.
This information proved in due course to be well founded, the gallant
warrior returning six months later filled with amatory ardour. It is
true that the witch forgot to mention that by that time he would be
ousted from Griselda's heart by--if I remember aright--a dashing young
milkman, and that he would incur a fine of _circa_ 40s. for assaulting
and battering him thereafter. Nevertheless public feeling below-stairs
remained strongly in favour of the ejected sorceress, and no minor
domestic mishap could happen for weeks thereafter but it was set down
as directly resulting from the witch's departing curses.

One other incursion into the World of Magic lingers in my memory as
having taken place in a seaside town that shall be nameless. While
there passing a holiday with some friends, I frequently observed large
yellow handbills, and even posters, setting forth that a lady, who
from her name appeared to be of Oriental antecedents, was prepared
to cast horoscopes, read palms, and arrange all kinds of personally
conducted tours into the future at fees which could only be described
as ridiculous. It so happened that among the members of the party
was a young lady who was then in the throes of her last love-affair.
Naturally anxious to learn its future course, she, it appears,
consulted the seeress, whom I will call, though it was not her name,
Madame Fatimah. So remarkable did the results appear that the convert
felt it her duty to acquaint the rest of us therewith. The fame of
Madame Fatimah was not long in penetrating to my ears, and the day came
when I found myself waiting upon the witch's doorstep. She was lodged
in a back street some little distance from the centre of the town, in
one of those lodging-houses which make a point of advertising that
they possess a fine sea view, as indeed they may if you ascend to the
roof or extend your body out of window at an acute angle. Certainly no
less promising hunting-ground for the witch-finder could be imagined.
Madame occupied the first floor, and delivered her prognostications
amid an Early-Victorian atmosphere of horsehair and antimacassars that
was not altogether unimpressive, though speaking of the past rather
than of the future. She was middle-aged, of comfortable rotundity, and
dressed in a black silk dress, over which was thrown a Japanese kimono
embroidered with wild geese. Doubtless from the long residence in the
Orient, to which she took an early opportunity of referring, and where
she had studied her art at the fountain-head from the lips of a native
gentleman very well known in magic circles, and very likely to the Evil
One himself, judging from Madame Fatimah's account of his prowess, but
whose name I can only vaguely remember as sounding something like Yogi
Chandra Dass--doubtless owing, I say, to her long absence from England,
for I understood that she was originally of British birth, though
married early in life to a Turkish or Indian magician of some note, she
had acquired a habit of either leaving out her aspirates altogether or
putting them in the wrong place. She was as businesslike as she was
affable, and detailed the various methods by which I could be made
acquainted with my past and future, at charges ranging from 2s. 6d. to
10s., with a crisp incisiveness. Having chosen what Madame described
as "the crystal" at 5s., she at once seized both my hands in hers
and gazed narrowly into my face, giving me the opportunity of myself
reading her past nearly enough to know that onions had been included in
the ingredients of her lunch. Satisfied, I trust, of my respectability,
she produced a round ball of glass or crystal and placed it on a black
ebony stand upon a table. Then, having darkened the room, made several
gestures, which I took for incantations, with her hands, and muttered
certain mystic formulas, she commanded me to gaze into the crystal and
tell her what I saw in its depths. I regret to say that my willingness
to oblige now led me into an indiscretion. Being in actual fact unable
to see anything at all, I was yet so anxious to appear worthy that I
imagined something I might expect to see. It took the form of a brown
baby, two crossed swords, and what might be either an elephant lying
on his back with his legs in the air, or the church of Saint John,
Westminster, seen from the north-west, the details being too hazy for
me to speak with absolute certainty. Madame Fatimah seemed slightly
disconcerted at first, but I am bound to admit that she very soon
displayed abundance of _savoir faire_, to say nothing of a sense of
humour, for without any further waste of time she announced that I must
look forward to a life of misfortune, that whether in business, in
love, or in pleasure I could expect nothing but disaster, and that I
should inevitably suffer death by hanging in my sixty-seventh year. Let
me only add that I paid her modest fee with the greatest willingness,
and that I have ever since remained convinced that the modern witch is
no whit behind her mediæval predecessor in those qualities which led
her to so high a place in the public estimation.

I have instanced these few examples of my personal knowledge of witches
and witchcraft not as throwing any light either upon their claims
or their methods, but simply as some proof of what I have adduced
earlier in this volume, that belief in witchcraft, under one form or
another, is as widely prevalent in the modern civilised world as ever
it was, and that it is ever likely to remain so. Nor does the fact
that rogues and vagabonds not a few have availed themselves of its
time-honoured respectability as a cloak for their petty depredations
at all detract from its claims to respectful credence. That great
faith is yet to be whose fundamental truths cannot be turned to the
advantage of the charlatan, the swindler and the sham devotee--the
greater the faith, indeed, so much the greater is, and must be, the
number of its exploiters, battening upon the devotion of the faithful.
Nevertheless, it is not upon questions of credibility or faith alone
that the world-empire of the witch is founded. Demonstrably true or
proven false, the cult of witchcraft has existed from the beginning and
will continue until the end of history. Worshipped or reviled, praised,
persecuted or condemned, witchcraft and the witch have endured and
will endure while there remains one man or woman on the earth capable
of dreading the Unknown. Rejoice or grieve as you will the witch is
the expression of one of the greatest of human needs--that of escaping
from humanity and its limitable environment--of one of the greatest of
human world-movements, the revolt against the Inevitable. She does and
must exist, for the strongest of all reasons, that constituted as it is
humanity could not exist without her.




BIBLIOGRAPHY


The principal authorities made use of in this volume, and not referred
to in the text, are given in the following list. The dates do not
necessarily refer to the original year of publication, but to the
edition made use of:--

 Adams, W.H. "Witch, Warlock and Magician." 1889.

 Ainsworth, H. "The Lancashire Witches."

 Andersen, Hans. "Fairy Tales."

 Augustine. "De Civitate Dei."

 Beaumont. "Treatise on Spirits."

 Blackstone. "Commentaries."

 Blau, Dr. Ludwig. "Das altjüdische Zauberwesen." 1898.

 Bodin, J. "De la Démonomanie des Sorciers." 1580.

 Boulton, Rich. "A Compleat History of Magick, Sorcery and Witchcraft."
 1715.

 Brand, J. "Popular Antiquities of Great Britain." 1905.

 Budge, E. A. "Egyptian Magic." 1899.

 Burr, G. "The Witch Persecutions." 1897.

 Casaubon, M. "Of Credulity." 1668.

 Cassel, P. "On Popular Rhymes and Charms." 1890.

 Davies, T. W. "Magic and Divination among the Hebrews." 1898.

 Fairfax, E. "Dæmonologia." 1622.

 Frazer, J. G. "The Golden Bough." 1900.

 Gomme, G. L. "Handbook of Folklore." 1890.

 Gould, S. Baring. "Old English Fairy Tales." 1895.

 Gould, S. Baring. "The Book of Were Wolves." 1865.

 Grimm. "Deutsche Mythologie."

 Harrison, F. (Edit.). "The New Calendar of Great Men." 1892.

 Holland, H. "A Treatise against Witchcraft." 1890.

 Horace. Sir Theodore Martin's Translation. 1861.

 Hughes, T. P. "Dictionary of Islam." 1896.

 Hutchinson, F. "Historical Essay on Witchcraft." 1718.

 Inman. "Ancient Faiths Embodied in Ancient Names."

 Innes, J. W. "Scottish Witchcraft Trials." 1880, &c.

 James I. "Dæmonologia." 1597.

 Jastrow, M. "Religion of Babylonia and Assyria." 1895.

 John, C. H. W. "The Oldest Code of Laws in the World." (Hammurabi.)

 King, L. W. "Babylonian Magic and Sorcery." 1896.

 Lancre, Pierre de. "Tableau de l'Inconstance des Mauvais Anges." 1612.

 Lane, E. W. "Arabian Nights" Translation. 1901.

 Law, R. "Memorialls of the Memorable Things that fell out Within this
 Island of Brittain from 1638-1684."

 Lecky, W. E. "History of Rationalism." 1869.

 Leland, C. G. "Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches." 1899.

 Linton, E. Lynn. "Witch Stories." 1861.

 Maspero, G. "The Dawn of Civilization." 1901.

 Mather, Cotton. "Memorable Providences relating to Witchcraft." 1689.

 Mather, Cotton. "The Wonders of the Invisible World." 1693.

 Maury, A. "La Magie et l'Astrologie." 1860.

 Melton, J. "Astrologastra." 1620.

 Meinhold, W. "Maria Schweidler, die Bernstein-Hexe." 1843.

 Meinhold, W. "Sidonia von Bork." 1848.

 Michelet, J. "La Sorcière."

 Middlemore, Mrs. "Spanish Tales." 1885.

 Mitford, A. "Tales of Old Japan." 1876.

 Müller, W. Max. "Die Liebespoesie der alten Ægypten." 1897.

 Nevins, W. S. "Witchcraft in Salem Village." 1892.

 Nares, R. "A Glossary." 1857.

 Pearson, K. "The Chances of Death and other Studies in Evolution." 1897.

 Pitcairn, R. "Criminal Trials in Scotland." 1833.

 Plato. "Laws."

 Pliny. "Natural History."

 Plutarch. "Lives."

 Scot, R. "The Discoverie of Witchcraft." 1584.

 Scott, Sir Walter. "Demonology and Witchcraft."

 Sepp, J. N. "Orient ŭnd Occident." 1903.

 Sharpe, C. K. "History of Witchcraft in Scotland." 1884.

 Sinclair, Geo. "Satan's Invisible World Displayed."

 Smith. "Dictionary of the Bible."

 Sprenger. "Malleus Maleficarum." 1486.

 Saladin. "Witchcraft in Christian Countries." 1882.

 Theocritus. Translation Bion and Moschus.

 Wiedemann, A. "Religion of the Ancient Egyptians." 1897.

 Wierus, J. "De Præstigiis." 1563.

 Wright, Thomas. "Narrative of Sorcery and Magic."

Also many pamphlets, chap-books, &c., &c., chiefly of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries.


R. CLAY AND SONS, LTD., BREAD ST. HILL, E.C., AND B

GAY, SUFFOLK.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF WITCHES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
